A beautiful waterfall flows out of Lake Serene above and cascades below the rugged east wall of Mount Index at the end of a safe, newly constructed trail, No. 1068, on the east side of Bridal Veil Creek. Take time to see and enjoy a stunning view of Bridal Veil Falls and climb flights of steps paralleling the falls. Children will be fascinated as they stand directly beside the water and look up a 100-foot rock face to see the streams of water that make up the bridal veil pouring beside them. An old nearby mine, the Honeymoon Mine, brought the original nineteenth-century travelers to the Lake Serene area.

Few times in life do hikers get the opportunity to enjoy a wonderful hiking adventure along a high, alpine ridge in a stunning wilderness area without first having to climb that ridge under their own steam. This is one of those rare opportunities.

Short, easy trail to the Stillaguamish River and the site of the railroad town of Robe and great views of the Stilliguamish River as it races by. The trail switchbacks through a forest of alder down to a forest of big leaf maple draped with lush mosses,  liverwort and licorice fern. The forest floor is thick with fern and colorful salmonberry.

Watch the kids!  The Stilliguamish runs swift and deep here, especially during periods of high water flow.

It is not recommended to continue on to the old railroad tunnels due to trail washout, slope slump and rockfall.

If you think you've got the goods to scramble up more than 1000 feet per mile, read on. Mailbox Peak brings a serious burn to the thighs of even the best-conditioned athletes, but the rewards make it all worthwhile. From the top of this jutting lump of rock, you'll enjoy spectacular views of the lower Snoqualmie River valleys. The entire Issaquah Alps range sprawls at your feet, with the rocky-topped Mount Si directly across the Middle Fork Valley and the sheer wall of Rattlesnake Ledge just across the South Fork Valley.

A 316-acre day-use park with on Lake Washington. Once a Catholic seminary, the park's rich history reflects in its grounds and architecture. Walks along the undeveloped lakeshore are peaceful and give visitors many opportunities for nature study.

The rewards are grand views, wonderful lessons in geology, and easy hiking. The only drawback of the route is the potential for crowds--the hiking is relatively easy, leading out of a popular car campground, so the masses flock to this scenic trail.

This loop hike is great for training and daily exercise.

Strenuous hike out of Monte Cristo with trail conditions ranging from smooth incline to rough rock scrambles. Absolutely beautiful hike along the way and even better once you reach your destination.

The South District of the Mount Tahoma Trails Association (MTTA) network offers spectacular snow recreation, even though you're seldom above 4500 feet.

More solitude than many trails, the steep climb will end in rewarding 360 degree views that are hard to beat.

Follow Tiger Mountain's finest old rail line while exploring some of the wildest and remotest stands of forest remaining on the mountain. You'll even find some outstanding views during this long, gentle hike. If you want to keep from swatting mosquitoes with every step, visit in fall through spring.

Scenic hike that can be done in under 2 hours, with panoramic views, lush forest, wildflowers, and a historic lookout tower that ups the coolness factor.

Denny Creek may be the most family-friendly trail in the region. The popular path leads to a series of waterfalls and to a smooth natural waterslide - a massive rock face over which the creek flows, providing a slippery summertime escape from the heat of the lowlands. Just beyond, hikers will find a couple more falls--most notably the beautiful Keekwulee Falls.

Take a leisurely stroll up the Tieton River Canyon among color-changing cottonwoods, aspens, Garry oaks and shrubby willows, all putting on one of the most spectacular autumn displays you’ll ever see.

Loop trip nirvana in the North Cascades! Picturesque alpine lakes, gorgeous open ridges, knife-edged mountains and mountain wildlfowers dominate this hike.

A loop trail on the west side of Squak Mountain that connects with the West Access Trail, the Perimeter Loop Trail, and the East Side Trail.

A connector trail on the east side of Squak Mountain. Make loops of Summit Trail and Phil's Creek or East Ridge Trail with Old Griz.

Extend your hike on Squak Mountain by connecting the May Valley Trail with the Chybinski Trail via the Perimeter Loop Trail.

A trail on the west side of Squak Mountain. Part of the Phil's Trail - Thrush Gap Loop, and connects to Old Griz, Summit Trail, May Valley Loop, and East Side Trail.

A northwest approach to the summit of Squak Mountain.

A short connector trail between Bullitt Fireplace Trail and West Access Trail in the Squak Mountain trail system.

Hike to the summit of quiet Squak Mountain in the Issaquah area.

Take the Squak Mountain Access Trail to access trails on the east side of the mountain: East Ridge, East Side, Phil's Creek, Old Griz, and more.

A connector trail between East Ridge and Bullitt Fireplace trail on Squak Mountain.

A 1.5 mile connector trail winding up the East Ridge of Squak Mountain. Accesses the Summit Trail and the East Side Trail.

This forested park, a wilderness with glimpses of Issaquah below, has miles of winding trails alongside bubbling creeks and narrow ravines. There are several trail loop options on this 2,024-foot-high mountain. With multi-use trails and a natural area, hikers have plenty to explore in this quiet sanctuary outside of Issaquah.





The beach is grand and the campground most inviting, but South Whidbey's best attribute is its forest: it's over 250 years old, sporting massive cedars and Douglas-firs. One of the finest tracts of old growth remaining on the Puget Sound shoreline, it was nearly logged in the 1970s. Today a trail bearing the name of the husband and wife responsible for mobilizing the public to protect it weaves through the impressive grove.

At this high and lonely outpost among the craggy giants of the Chelan Mountains, views are grand and company is rare. Pugh Ridge sits smack dab in the middle of the North Fork Entiat watershed, a de facto wilderness sans motors and quite a quiet contrast to the Entiat Valley. It's a grueling grunt to the flower gardens and breathtaking belvederes of Pugh, but worth every calorie spent.

A delightful loop along a tight gorge carved by the Icicle River, this hike makes for a perfect early and late-season leg stretcher. Its good tread and gentle terrain also make it ideal for children, first-time hikers, and those trying to get back into the groove. Leisurely stroll along this major tributary of the Wenatchee River, watching for darting dippers and admiring raucous rapids and swirling pools.

Merritt is a popular lake-in fact crowded at times-but not much of a lake. The trail is good and the old-growth forest appealing, but the lake itself is swarming with mosquitoes, shallow and grassy, and with a shoreline trampled by overuse. Merritt appears to lack much merit. A trip in fall, however, when the buzzing buggers are absent and deciduous shrubs streak the lake basin red and yellow, has its charms. And if you want adventure, find Lost Lake, the largest lake on Nason Ridge and one whose tough approach keeps visitation down.

A warm, inviting lake, a gentle summit carpeted in flowering meadows, entrancing views, and deep, soothing wilderness are all yours on this hike. Easy to reach, Lake Janus beckons its fair share of anglers and beginning backpackers, while Grizzly's bear of a distance culls all but the strongest hikers. Those who do push on, however, will be rewarded with continuous panoramic viewing, all while 
under the watchful guise of majestic snow- and ice-crowned Glacier Peak.

You won't find any slain warriors at Lake Valhalla, nor will maidens escort you here, but ancient conifers line the gallant shores and boisterous chickadees usher you along the backbone of the Cascades. Unlike Odin's Valhalla, this one is very real and attainable by all willing to expend a little energy and expunge the outside world for a little while. On this inspiring march through a corridor of majestic tress, you may end up humming a little Wagner en route.

Venture up a valley cloaked in magnificent old-growth regalia. Deception Creek is one of the finest ancient-forest hikes within the entire Alpine Lakes Wilderness-its treasured trees will have you oohing and aahing the entire way. But there's more to this trail than arboreal admiring. There's the creek itself, a silvery ribbon that slithers over boulders and crashes down rocky sluiceways. Deception Creek is ideal for early season forays, rainy-day sauntering, a midsummer retreat, or whenever you just feel like being alone with nature.

Covering more than 16,000 acres, the Turnbull Wildlife Refuge serves as a wildlife sanctuary to hundreds of bird species, including twenty-seven species of ducks. Mammals thrive here as well, taking advantage of the vast undisturbed habitat (only 2200 acres of the refuge are open to the public). Most visitors never leave their vehicles, taking advantage instead of the great views along the 5.5-mile auto-tour route on a well-graded gravel road. That means hikers can find solitude as they explore the wonderful wildlife habitat of the area.

Great day hike through old growth with the final 1000' on the west slope rock of Red Mountain.  When dry, this roughly 40 degree incline is mostly a walk-up with hands needed here and there.  Amazing 360 degree view from the summit.

Enjoy a variety of fun, funky art on the first section of trail, including many of the Sauer's carved totems and faces on trees. Climb steadily through balsamroot and lupine, as well as bluebells, and phlox for a stunning view of the Enchantments.

A nice trip through a quiet forest that features trees, moss, and ferns on a steep hillside above a babbling creek.

Explore a beautiful state park near the Skagit River with an extensive trail network and beautiful campsites.

A short, self guided nature trail near Newhalem. See a wide variety of native plants and animals along this hike that is great for kids.

Mount Spokane State Park has trails for all types, and something for every season. Hike in the summertime to the relocated fire lookout atop Quartz Mountain, or explore the area in a snowy winter wonderland.

Spokane State Park offers four-season recreation, from great hiking spring through fall to wonderful snowshoeing and cross-country skiing in the winter. Pick up a map at the park or online, then choose from a variety of destinations -- a CCC cabin, the top of Mount Spokane, Mount Kit Carson and much more.

Pinnacle is a delightfully beautiful alpine lake perched in a splendidly rugged basin on a shoulder of Mount Pilchuck. The hike is short, but not so sweet-unless you stop at Bear Lake, which is the kid-friendly part of this trip. The rest is rocky, rooty, muddy, and steep, and if it weren't for the big trees you'd swear you were hiking the Appalachians. But once upon the tarn-tarnished ridge leading up to Pinnacle Lake, you're quickly reminded that this can only be the Northwest.

A class 2 scramble up Esmerelda Peak.

The Indian Heaven Wilderness may be the most underrated wilderness area in Washington. This oft-forgotten gem is one of the most beautiful in the Cascades, and has been a popular gathering place for wilderness-loving humans for centuries. Part of the reason for that, of course, is the abundance of berries along the trail-starting with a vast field on the south flank of Red Mountain, just below the lookout tower- which gives a strong hint as to how the wilderness area earned its name.

There are several trail heads that can take you to the top of Mt. Kit Carson ranging from easy to difficult.  Offers amazing elevated views of the surrounding Spokane area as well as some of the local lakes.

A scramble up Mount Angeles just off the Klahhane Ridge hike in Olympic National Park.

As the site of a former fire lookout, hikers can expect the typical steep ascent to a glorious view that lookouts are notorious for.

Blocked logging road that is impassible except by foot or mountain bike (motorized vehicles are not allowed). Once you make it to the clear cut area (about 2200 ft), you can see the Seattle skyline, Olympics, and of course, Mount Rainier.

Hikers of all ages, especially children, will love this easy loop, one of the finest nature trails in Western Washington.  Plenty of birds and critters will captivate you along the way.

An out-and-back hike along the Lewis River, crossing a picturesque footbridge and then following the Lewis River for just over 2.5 miles. A perfect hike for people of all ages.

A birder's paradise, this wildlife refuge is the perfect get-away without a long drive. The refuge includes mixed wetlands and pastures with riparian strips lined with cottonwoods and white oak trees. More than 200 species of waterfowl and songbirds have been recorded here, making it the perfect place to slow down and enjoy nature.

The Discovery Park Loop Trail offers an enjoyable outing to hikers without having to leave the Seattle city limits.  While the park contains a trail network of over 11 miles, the 2.8 mile Loop hike is a great way to take in a wide range of diverse scenery in a relatively short distance.

Traversing a high ridge due north of Mount St. Helens, this trail offers some of the best views of the volcano's massive crater and huge blast area. Goat Mountain hikers can see the yawning crater and the piled rubble of the new lava dome, as well as the incredible changes to the land in front of the blast.

A steep climber's trail with a gorgeous payoff. Wait until the end of summer before attempting, due to snow staying late in high elevations.

Enough bits of history along the way to keep it interesting; an old safe, mine tunnels. A little mud stomping to start off, then a wander along a couple of creek valleys with some big old trees ( that so far have managed to escape being logged). The cabin built in the late 1890's, just up hill, sits in a clear cut now. Some pine ridges part way up, and at the top views out to farmland, into Canada, and to the saltwater.

Tucked in the heart of the rugged Chiwaukum Range, Larch Lake is a spectacular high-country lake flanked by rocky spires and ringed with its soft-needled namesakes. Remote and breathtakingly beautiful, getting there is quite a jaunt. It requires a slog up and over McCue Ridge and an up-and-over McCue slog again on the return. But the sweeping alpine views . . . and big, shimmering Chiwaukum Lake . . . and wide-open Ewing Basin along the way all help ease the pain.

One of the best hiking options in the 90,000-acre Capitol State Forest, the Sherman Creek Loop travels up and down two visually appealing valleys. No grand views or grand forest here - just miles of tranquil woods and creekside walking and some historic relics from the golden age of logging. Equestrians and mountain bikers share these trails, but crowding isn't an issue. Come during the week and have this place to yourself.

Stroll along  this stunning trail through the blown-down woods up onto a high windswept ridge with incredible views of the mighty Mount St. Helens and the expanse of the Mount Margaret backcountry area.

Lacamas Lake Park is a diverse natural area with a surprisingly 'wild' feel for a park this close to town. Picnic by the lake, check out the Camas meadow in bloom, or explore the forest and creeks along the many trails.

Bench and Snow lakes are found just above the head of the Stevens Canyon Road, but you'll feel like you're deep in the backcountry once you immerse yourself in the cool lakes basin. The lakes are clear and pristine, and the upper lake, Snow, is nestled in a snow-filled cirque with fabulous views up to Unicorn Peak. Bench Lake boasts a great view of Mount Rainier.

This easy-to-moderate hike brings you through lush meadows, planted forest trees, and a stump-filled clearing to the monument dedicated to Robert Henry Hauberg, the founder of the Pilchuck Tree Farm. The monument meadow has great views of the valley below plus the Sound and the islands.

Your time is running out. Without radical changes in global practices, glaciers could disappear entirely in the Lower 48 states, and the ice rivers on Mount Rainier are already in full retreat. Fortunately, we can still see the mighty ice sheets and even get up-close and personal with them.

A moderate hike up the side of Chelan Butte and across the top of the ridge promises outstanding views of the Columbia Plateau, Columbia River, Lake Chelan and surrounding areas.

If for some terrible reason you are only allowed one hike in the Olympics in your lifetime, this should be it. The trail to Marmot Pass captures the very essence of what makes the Olympics so special, and so darned pretty. Towering old growth, a tumbling pristine river, resplendent alpine meadows, and horizon-spanning views that include majestic snow-clad craggy spires-they're all part of this amazing hike. And it gets even better-being in the Olympic rain shadow, Marmot Pass is often kissed with sunbeams while nearby ridges swirl with clouds.

Located in Liberty Lake County Park, this 8 mile loop hike is an excellent choice on a hot summer day. Views are infrequent, but shade is plentiful. High points include one of the last stands of old growth cedar in Spokane County and a year round waterfall which is very impressive during spring run off.

Whether a summer hike or a winter snowshoe, the former grade of the Great Northern Railway, and Seattle’s first railroad connection to the East, makes a pleasant mountain ramble easily accessible from either side of the Cascades.

Twenty-eight miles of very scenic hiking on the Pacific Crest Trail. This is a great intro to backpacking hike: Four days, 7 to 8 miles per day of “relatively” flat backpack packing. The trail is well marked, there are abundant camp sites and many stopping points along the way.

Box Canyon is one of the most unusual features in the park, and Nickel Creek Camp is a rustic backcountry retreat perfect for kids' first back-packing adventure. The trail explores the rim of the deep chasm of Box Canyon before swinging out through the forest for a woodland ramble into the Nickel Creek valley along this short section of the Wonderland Trail.

Van Trump Park, named for the first man to reach the summit of Mount Rainier, stretches across the ridges above Comet Falls. Vast wildflower fields comprise the parklands, and these fields are popular with foraging deer and mountain goats. Van Trump Park requires a good deal of effort to reach, but once it's attained, the rewards are boundless. Grand views accompanied by a plethora of local flora and fauna create a truly special wilderness experience.

Hike to a high hidden valley housing one of the largest alpine lakes in the Sawtooth Range. Under the watchful eyes of 7742-foot Rennie Peak, an 8000-plus-foot nameless neighbor and a junta of jagged pinnacles, Louis Lake's lofty surroundings are quite stunning. But despite such a rugged setting, the trek to Louis is most agreeable. Hoof this way in early summer before the horses arrive and enjoy a dazzling floral show as an added bonus.

From popular Colonial Creek Campground in the Ross Lake National Recreation Area, this short and easy hike takes off for a promontory high above manmade Diablo Lake. Thunder Knob makes a perfect family friendly hike if you're camping below, or a great leg stretcher if you're traveling through on the North Cascades Highway. The trail is all accessible too, meaning outdoor lovers confined to wheelchairs can also enjoy this hike. And due to its low elevation, it rarely snows on the knob, allowing for winter rambling in the heart of the North Cascades National Park Complex.

Hike one of the deepest, wildest, and most accessible wilderness valleys in the North Cascades National Park Complex. Let Thunder Creek's incessant bellowing woo you into this primeval pocket. Enjoy scenic creekside resting posts perfect for whiling away the afternoon. Admire ancient cedars and towering firs and, from holes in the thick forest canopy, gaze out to jagged peaks cloaked in glacial ice. And while the surrounding high country is blanketed in white, enjoy this hike early or late in the season thanks to its low elevation.

Wedged between craggy Thunder and Spark Plug mountains, these two lakes are set in a truly electrifying environment, flanked by towering evergreens and slopes of shiny granite ledges and talus. But even more stimulating than these aquatic gems is the forest that lines the trail leading to them. It's one of the finest tracts of old growth along the US 2 corridor.

Venture up a valley as wild as any in the adjacent national park. Marvel at the sheer height, girth, and biomass of some of the biggest trees you'll ever lay eyes on. Watch in awe as the churning, tumbling Upper South Fork Skokomish crashes and squeezes through a narrow box canyon. And while the Upper South Fork lacks federal wilderness protection, this area is nothing but pure Olympic wilderness.

Lush old-growth forest; dark, mysterious forest lakes; and a wonderful chance to meet and see wildlife await hikers here.

Hike along Washington's dramatic fjord-like Lake Chelan, traversing sun-kissed ledges and blossom-bursting hillsides and weaving through cool forested ravines cut by cascading creeks. Stand high above the sparkling waters of America's third-deepest lake, which catches striking reflections of frosted pointy peaks. Feel rushes of wind funnel down the deep lake-cradling gorge. Listen to aspen leaves rustle, a lone loon cry, waves lap against lakeside ledges, and perhaps a rattling warning.

Towering and formidable, Mount Index is perhaps the most awesome and fiercest sight and site along US 2. But softening its stark appearance is Bridal Veil Falls. Emanating from beneath the mountain's austere crags, the tiered and tumbling cataract drapes over granite slabs. To really appreciate this plummeting waterway, however, you'll need to leave your vehicle and hit the trail. And in your journey, discover a secret - there's a beautiful lake perched beneath those rugged spires feeding those falls.

Grand Ridge Park includes 7 miles of WTA-built trail through western red cedar trees, sword ferns, nettles, berries and, at times, slugs. This trail is a little piece of the backcountry close to Seattle and is open to hikers, mountain bikers and equestrians.

Find supreme wildflower gardens and a high-country plateau speckled with shimmering tarns-but that's not all. Spectacular alpine vistas abound too-of Baker, Shuksan, and all those rugged and craggy peaks straddling the 49th parallel. Yellow Aster Butte may be a misnomer (those yellow-petaled delights are actually daisies), but you definitely don't want to miss hiking here.

The trip to Indian Bar will test your trail stamina, but the payoff is an adventure in wildflowers. The basin that cradles Indian Bar Camp may well be the home of the best wildflower fields in the park. The main camp is on a small ridge above the meadows, though an old stone shelter in the heart of the meadow marks the location of the group camp. It's also worth noting that the single most spectacular backcountry toilet in the state is found here.

A series of falls, nine in all, two that are stunning and one-the tallest at 265 feet-that's absolutely spectacular! As Wallace Falls is one of the best known and loved sets of cataracts in the Evergreen State, expect plenty of company on this hike. And while these falls are grand any time of year, visit on a rainy day. Each raindrop that falls from the heavens and makes its way to the Wallace River enhances the intensity and stimulating beauty of this cavalcade of crashing cascades.

There's an awful lot to see here, although the trail mileage may look low to some. You'll find expansive meadows full of wildflowers, berries, and possibly big black-tailed deer. You'll be able to visit a beautiful mountain lake, and climb a stunning peak to panoramic views. And you'll explore some glorious ancient forests. All within a couple miles' radius.

Located within the 44,000-acre Buckhorn Wilderness, Tunnel Creek is one of the quietest trails in the Olympic rain shadow. Perhaps because it doesn't lead to a major lake or peak, this trail escapes the attention of many hikers. It didn't escape the attention of the Washington State Department of Transportation, however-they featured the creek on the cover of the 2002-2003 official state highway map.

Amble aimlessly along an easy ridge on the edge of the Alpine Lakes Wilderness. Scrounge for berries or lounge in sun-kissed meadows. Then follow a faint path to a long-ago lookout site still flush in stunning alpine views. Come in summer for dazzling floral displays or in autumn for carpets of crimson unfurled along the way. But no matter the season, come during the week, for Sawyer's admirers are legion.

These easy-to-reach lakes receive a lot of visitors every sunny summer weekend, but don't let that keep you away. All those people can't be wrong--even if it means sharing. In fact, bring the kids--by mid-August the snow-fed lakes have warmed enough that you can take a swim without turning blue.

Imagine hiking in Mount Rainier National Park without having to deal with the crowds and the Park Service regulations and restrictions. That's basically what you have here: a short hike so close to the big mountain that you'll feel like you're right on the flank of Mount Rainier.

Wander woods reminiscent of eastern hardwood forest, filled with aspen, hemlock and birch along the largest natural lake in the Colville National Forest—plus enjoy one of the best western larch displays in Eastern Washington.

If there's such a thing as a wilderness superhighway, this is it. The Snow Lake Trail is Washington's most heavily used trail within a designated wilderness area. On any given summer weekend, you can expect to share the area with upward of two hundred hikers. Fortunately, midweek the route is virtually deserted, and after Labor Day the number of weekend hikers drops to more reasonable levels.

An upside-down trail letting you cruise to your destination and then pay for it later. Even though you must climb more than 1000 feet on your return, the grade is fairly gentle and the tread is smooth. With a new bridge in place across the Gray Wolf River, the Slab Camp Creek Trail offers the best and easiest way into the upper reaches of this wilderness valley. The trees are big, the river impressive, and company is scarce.

With miles of flower- saturated meadows along a rolling lofty ridge radiating from the big volcano itself, Skyline Divide is one of Baker's best offerings to the hiking community. While the views are supreme-from the snowy peaks of British Columbia to the salty waters of Puget Sound-you'll struggle keeping your eyes off of what the area's first peoples called Koma Kulshan, "the Great White One." A popular place on a summer weekend, Skyline provides enough nooks and crannies to spread out. And while this hike is 4.5 miles long, feel free to quit anytime after 2 miles-there's no shortage of views along the way.

This route loops around the broad Edith Creek basin, leading through alpine flower fields, past thundering waterfalls, and over high, craggy peaks. In this one loop, you'll experience the best the Paradise region has to offer in terms of scenic beauty, rugged hiking, and varied terrain and ecosystems. You'll also find a memorial marking an important event in park history!

A 110-acre Skagit County Park with the largest remaining undeveloped waterfront on Fidalgo Island near Anacortes. Highlights include a freshwater beaver pond and the stunning views of Rosario Strait.

Just south of the village of La Push are three Olympic Coast charms: First, Second, and Third Beaches. Each one is sandy and broad and hemmed in by dramatic bluffs and headlands. And while they're in close proximity to each other, you can't hike from one to the next because those headlands block the way. With roadside access, First Beach is the easiest to get to and so can be crowded. Third Beach requires a 1.2-mile slog down a forested trail. But Second Beach is just right: a hike just long enough to discourage crowds, yet short enough to encourage all who want to see this beautiful beach.

While most hikers cross the bridge and go left, heading upstream along the main Middle Fork Trail, savvy hikers looking for a solitary short hike will turn right and scramble downstream. There once was a popular trail on this side of the river, and hard-core backcountry anglers will still find their way up a faint boot-beaten path alongside Rainy Creek all the way to trout heaven at Rainy Lake. For most hikers, though, a simple hike alongside the Middle Fork will be sufficient escape.

The path to Pratt Lake was once a braided super highway, at times more than 10 feet wide. Hardly the stuff of wilderness. But Washington Trails Association (WTA) volunteers stepped in and rebuilt the trail. Not only did they rebuild the tread to channel all hikers onto the proper path, they decommissioned all the unauthorized secondary trails, creating a new single track worthy of a pristine wild area. Hikers can now stroll easily up this picturesque trail to the pretty Pratt Lake basin.

Venture up a wild basin beneath the towering cliffs of Mount Dickerman. Transition along the way from avalanche blast zones to forest primeval to tarn-topped alpine meadows complete with views of Washington's most elegant volcano, Glacier Peak. And there's more: an awesome waterfall, a slew of rare plants, and an opportunity for experienced scramblers to subdue a duo of scenic summits.

Peabody Creek Loop Trail is a 0.5 mile trail beginning in the Visitor Center parking area.

Saunter to Windy Pass on a clear summer day and ask yourself a simple question. Does it get any better than this? Watch shadows cast by cotton-candy clouds dance across an awe-inspiring landscape of deep dark valleys and emerald ridges. Admire endless columns of icy and rocky spiraling peaks piercing the cobalt sky. Walk mesmerized through rapturous alpine gardens; waves of dazzling wildflowers gently swaying in warm breezes. Look out across some of the wildest wilderness remaining on the North American continent and let your senses whirl. Yet, you've hardly broken a sweat getting here. No, it doesn't get any better than this.

Starting in well-protected sub-alpine wilderness and descending into heavily-logged, privately-owned land, this stretch of the PCT offers a dramatic illustration of the effects of public land protection and private industry on Washington's landscape.

A beautiful lake perched on the Cascade crest in the heart of the Henry M. Jackson Wilderness.  Pear is a scenic delight, served with a fine accompaniment of old-growth forests, wildflower meadows, and alpine views and is indeed  a sweet destination.  This approach has its advantages in the form of Top Lake, Fall Mountain, and few fellow hikers.

One of the most spectacular settings in the entire North Cascades, Park Butte provides unsurpassed views of the snowy volcano Baker as well as inviting and outstanding high country that begs to be explored. The historical fire lookout, one of the few remaining in these parts, teeters on the edge of a craggy knoll offering Imax-like showings of Washington's third-highest summit. Come here in summer and play in fields of snow. Come in autumn and roam through fields scorched in crimson. But try to come on a weekday, for the crowds are legion at Park Butte, one of the top hiking destinations in the Northwest.

Sometimes, even the most gung-ho hiker needs a break-just a gentle walk through the woods, followed by a leisurely swim and a relaxing afternoon alongside a cool lake. Packwood Lake is the perfect place to practice this laid-back trail lifestyle, especially late in the spring and early in the autumn when the hordes of summer hikers have gone home, freeing up the lake's popular campsites and excellent fishing opportunities.

Early tourists flocked to Ohanapecosh not because it was so spectacularly pretty, but because of the water. More specifically, because of the hot water burbling out of the ground. Today, the lounging pools along the river are gone, but hot water still seeps out of the rocks before merging into the icy-cold waters of the Ohanapecosh River.

This is a very old, historic trail. It may have been a Native American trade route across the Olympics. It was rebuilt by the CCC in the 1930's. It was relocated several years ago and re-opened from the Quilcene side through the notch in the Quilcene Range (easily seen from Highway 101.) It climbs steeply through the notch and then traverses along the Quilcene Range.

One of the most hiked summits in the Olympics, and it's easy to see why this peak is so popular. Easy access, a long hiking season, and unparalleled views of Puget Sound and the eastern half of the Olympics give Mount Townsend quite an edge. Of the three trails leading to its summit, Trail No. 839 is the route most taken. It's not the shortest way, but it offers incredible biological diversity and one of the best built and maintained trails in the Buckhorn Wilderness.

Mirror Lake is arguably the fairest lake of all in the area south of Snoqualmie Pass. This region has been ravaged by logging, and the few pockets of undisturbed wildlands generally are unremarkable.

Three beautiful backcountry lakes tucked in a hidden valley surrounded by craggy summits await at the end of this arduous hike. A boot-beaten path that leaves you beat, the Mildred Lakes Trail was forged by tenacious fishermen and masochistic hikers. An entanglement of roots, slippery rocks, and an up-and-down course that defies logic, this hike is about the destination, not the journey. But boy is the fishing good; that's what lures most visitors to these aquatic gems.

The Middle Fork Snoqualmie River is a fast-moving, cold river that few hikers would care to cross on their own. But when the Forest Service and a team of volunteers installed a bridge over the Middle Fork near the mouth of the Taylor River, hikers gained new trails to explore and the Middle Fork Trail is one of the best recreational resources in the valley.

Hikers of all calibers will appreciate the waterfalls here, while swimmers/soakers will love the pools found along the creek. Between water features, this hike explores cool forest and affords plenty of opportunities to see wildlife. The route climbs, steeply at times, along the Mesatchee Creek valley to the crest of the long, rambling American Ridge. You'll find great views from the wonderful alpine meadows lining the ridge top.

Ready for a stunning long hike through the otherwordly landscape of Mount St. Helens?  The Loowit Trail reveals the volcano and the blast zone in all its raw glory.

Many claim this two-step falls is the most beautiful waterfall in the park. The 320-foot cascade fans out as it crashes down the basalt cliffs, providing a spectacular show of force and beauty. The trail to this natural wonder climbs the steep valley of Van Trump Creek, offering little along the way other than an experience in the forest primeval. But once you reach the waterfall basin, that overly average trail suddenly seems exceptional.

An easy, short loop hike out of the Lone Fir campground. The first bit is paved before giving way to a dirt trail that follows Early Winters Creek. After a creek crossing (log bridge) it loops back to the campground.

An extremely popular backcountry lake surrounded by ancient timber and ringed with designated campsites complete with fire rings-don't expect a wilderness experience on this hike. You'll encounter all walks of life on this wide, well-groomed, and easy-graded trail that delivers the masses to Lena Lake. Those willing to expend a little more energy can push farther into wilder and quieter places. But if you're intent on Lena, expect lots of company unless you visit in the waning days of autumn.

Hiking to Leadbetter Point, you will find yourself at peace looking out onto the beautiful coast just south of the Olympic Peninsula.  The beaches and coastal wildlife will take your breath away!

An additional excursion for those visiting Fragrance Lake, Lost lake is a great little side trip to get some additional exercise and enjoy some beautiful green foliage.

This is a delightful loop back into history, full of scenic surprises. Thanks to the Volunteers for Outdoor Washington (VOW) this historic rail line through the Cascades has been rescued from oblivion and transformed into a top-notch trail ideal for hikers of all ages and abilities, as well as for lovers of Northwest and railroad history. So get your caboose in gear and, with all due respect to the Man in Black, walk the line!

A hike on the edge of Spokane Valley with commanding views of Spokane Valley and the Palouse. Many plant species typical of Western Slopes of Cascades, a seasonal stream, and amazing variety of wildflowers through from late March through mid-July.

Defiance is futile! This peak and its stunning views will amaze you. The long ridge spine to the north of the South Fork Snoqualmie River (the I-90 corridor) offers some of the steepest hiking trails in the Cascades, but also some of the best views. With clear skies and clean air around you, views will stretch across the breadth of Washington--from Mount Baker near the Canadian border to Mount Adams (and very faintly, Mount Hood) near the Columbia River and the -Oregon border.

The wide-open trail to Hannegan Pass and Hannegan Peak offers spectacular mountain views, glorious alpine wildflowers, waterfalls and glaciers. Choose to hike to Hannegan Pass (about 8 miles roundtrip; 5050' elev.) or to the dizzying heights of Hannegan Peak (10.6 miles roundtrip; 6200' elev.).

Gold Creek Pond is an ADA-accessible paved loop hike around a picturesque mountain pond atop Snoqualmie Pass.

This trail stays just outside Mount Rainier National Park, but the highlights of the trek are the outstanding views east to the glaciers that cover the west flank of the big volcano. The trail is relatively flat and open, though at times the tread is rough and brushy--maintenance of the trail is a once-in-a-while occurrence. Fortunately, the path is easy to follow and offers a wonderfully unique view of Mount Rainier. Few people get to see the west face of the mountain from this close. Since the trail is completely outside the park, dogs are welcome on it.

This is a long, steep climb to a prominent peak perched smack-dab in the middle of some of the finest mountain scenery in North America. Mounts Baker and Shuksan breathe their frosty breaths upon you. A choppy sea of jagged peaks from British Columbia to the Picket Range washes up upon your boots. Gaze out to salty waters or deep into the heart of the North Cascades wilderness. And best of all, you wont' be competing for space on the summit. The crowds are over at nearby Hannegan Peak.

Franklin Falls is a great hike to take with young children. It is short, with a gentle climb, and a pretty waterfall at trail's end. The trail starts just outside the Denny Creek Campground and travels along the South Fork Snoqualmie River to the falls.

The Necklace Valley makes a wonderful 2-3 night backpack trip for hearty hikers, and rewards with cool alpine lakes to swim and fish in, or just camp beside. Or take a day trip along the East Fork Foss River admire the amazing second-growth tree canopy.

A delightful hike through ancient timber along the crystal-clear Dungeness River-save this one for a hot or rainy day. Quite possibly the easiest 3.4 miles of wilderness trail in the Olympics, the Upper Dungeness is ideal for introducing neophytes and youngsters to the backcountry. Handy dandy Camp Handy with its restored shelter provides cover on overcast days, allowing you to enjoy your lunch while droplets run down the cedar shingles.

Explore one of the quieter Olympic Peninsula river valleys. Quiet, that is, if you don't count the Duckabush River's constant belching, crashing, and churning as it tumbles over giant boulders and squeezes through narrow rocky clefts.

One of the largest and easiest to hike to bodies of water within the sprawling 393,360-acre Alpine Lakes Wilderness, Lake Dorothy is not for the solitude seeker. Expect scores of first-time hikers, neophyte backpackers, and fledgling anglers scurrying about the shores of this almost 2-mile-long sparkling lake. If it's a real wilderness experience you seek, and a satisfying day-long hike as well, push farther to the twin lakes of Bear and Deer.

A beautiful and easy hike for anyone who wants to explore the north region of Lake Chelan and all the treasures it has to offer.

This is a popular trail that offers great views and a pleasant trail experience-wildflowers grace the forest meadows and clearings, and wildlife roams the area.

Pack a fishing pole and a camera. There are many meal-sized trout in this basin's lakes, and there are endless views to enjoy both on the trail and at the trail's end. The route pierces the old-growth for-est in the valley as it enters the Alpine Lakes Wilderness and leads to glorious examples of the wilderness's namesake lakes. Hester Lake sprawls below Mount Price, and short scrambles are possible to Little Hester Lake and the scenic ridges around the basin.

The Chinook Trail #108B is a section of the Chinook Trail System, an yet-to-be-realized 300 mile bi-state loop encircling the Columbia River Gorge. The #108B section connects the Tarbell Trail to the Silver Star Trail. Many still refer to this section as the Kloochman Butte Trail and it was formerly known as the Squaw Butte Trail.

This rugged hike is bound to become a classic, if it isn’t already. The full trail loop provides fantastic views of the Columbia River Gorge, an intimate look at the Cape Horn Falls and a challenging workout as it climbs and descends the rocky slopes of Cape Horn.

Take the long and scenic way to Cape Disappointment's North Head Lighthouse.  From the high headland that houses the 1898 lighthouse, take in breathtaking views that include thundering waves, windswept dunes, and scores of shorebirds skimming the crashing surf.

This trail is a rarely traveled and quite rustic trail used primarily by climbers as an alternate climbing route for Mount Baker. Though not for the faint of heart, this hike has a truly spectacular payoff in views and provides a solitary hiking experience.

Set in a large cirque in the rugged Monte Cristo peaks and fed by the Columbia Glacier and icy snowfields hanging and clinging to the surrounding steep slopes, Blanca's location is as dramatic as any in the Cascades. But what really strikes all who toil up the steep trail to witness this marvel is the lake's cobalt blue water. Its sheen and tone constantly change, depending on the amount and angle of sunlight shining down on it.

Bird Creek Meadows is a short, easy crowd pleaser. Known for its abundant wildflower meadows, views of Mt. Adams, Mt. Hood and the Hellroaring Canyon, and little creeks, lakes and waterfalls, the trail provides a nice 3-mile loop for hikers.

Hikers have been marveling at these frozen spectacles of nature for over a century. Reached by one of the most manicured trails in the Cascades, Big Four's famed ice caves can be enjoyed by hikers of all walks. Formed from cascading water and warm winds hollowing out heaps of avalanche-deposited snow, the caves usually appear by midsummer.

The Bells Mt. trail is a non-motorized, multi-use trail constructed by the Chinook Trail Association (CTA) and managed by the DNR. It is part of a 30-mile stretch of the Chinook Trail that was awarded National Recreation Trail Status in 2005.

Barclay Lake sits snug between Merchant Peak and Baring Mountain, an awesome pair of imposing peaks. A gentle and easy hike, Barclay is a welcoming portal into the rugged terrain of Washington's newest wilderness, the 106,577-acre Wild Sky. The well-graded and maintained trail gains a little more than 200 feet of elevation in a little more than two miles, making it an ideal trek for children and beginning hikers.

Beautiful backcountry lakes, bountiful berry patches, glimpses of glaciers, and the option of hoofing to an old lookout site overlooking Baker and peaks and valleys north and south-no wonder this area is darn popular. The trails are short and wonderful for introducing young'uns to the great outdoors, but there's a fair amount of elevation to be gained to and fro, so be sure to bring the kid harness or at least extra chocolate bars.

This is the old traditional trail to Mount Si's peak. It's much steeper and hence shorter than the more frequently used trail. A good portion of it will remind many hikers of Mailbox Peak and, like the new trail, is heavily used as a conditioner hike. Despite its name, the trail is in very good shape, mostly obvious, wide and comfortable. In snow, hike carefully, because it is steeper, it tends to be icier than the regular trail. Traction devices like crampons are highly recommended.

Nisqually is an excellent year-round destination for wildlife viewing and photography.

The Worm Flows Climbing Route, from Marble Mountain Snow-Park, is the most direct route to the summit of Mount St. Helens during the winter season. Ice axe, crampons, and avalanche awareness are recommended on this route. Skis with climbing skins or snow shoes with cleats are also highly recommended.

This trail is in extremely good shape and is well maintained. It makes for smooth traveling and is comfortably wide.

This hike has a little bit of everything (trout-filled lake, views, forest, flowers) and surprisingly a good dose of solitude.

This is an abandoned trail that heads south along Rainy Creek off of the downstream side of Middle Fork Snoqualmie Trail.

Don't expect to find much heather growing along the shores of this pretty little subalpine lake. That ubiquitous mountain shrub is pretty hard to find on this hike. But what you can expect to see along the way are some mighty fine old cedars. Expect, too, to be serenaded by babbling brooks, wooed by fine views of Mount Pilchuck's craggy, rocky north face, and charmed by Heather's placid waters. Don't plan on being alone here, however; this easy trail is one of the premier stomping grounds off of the Mountain Loop Highway. On a sunny summer weekend, you'll likely encounter the entire spectrum of the hiking world, from old-timers to neophytes and everyone in between.

Dense forest drapes the lower trail, keeping hikers cool on the hottest August afternoons. At trail's end, a deep lake waits to kill off the last of the summer heat--for those brave enough to dive into its icy waters. Between the thick second-growth forest stands and the high alpine lake, the trail rolls along Humpback Creek, offering tantalizing views now and again of pretty waterfalls along the tumbling creek.

Perched in a spectacular basin at the base of Mount Pilchuck's sheer northern face, sparkling Lake Twentytwo is a stunning sight. But there's more to this popular hike than the picturesque lake and its backdrop of waterfalls and avalanche chutes. For much of the way the well-constructed trail follows cascading Twentytwo Creek through an exemplary ancient forest of gargantuan cedars. An excellent hike to acquaint children and neophytes with the natural world-just don't expect to be alone on this favorite of many a Puget Sound hiker.

One look at the parking lot midday on any summer weekend, and the obvious will jump out and bite you: the Granite Mountain Trail is the most heavily traveled summit path in the Snoqualmie Pass corridor. Of course, there is a good reason for that: it's spectacular. But it's also steep. Mind numbingly, thigh-burning steep. You'll climb a heel-blistering 3800 feet in 4.3 miles to an old fire lookout at the 5600-foot summit, with awesome views in all directions. Pack plenty of water, as there is no good source along the trail.

A very challenging but very nice scramble. Goat Flats is gorgeous and the ladders to the lookout are invigorating. The views from the lookout can be incredible.

Cupped in a high cirque on snowy, craggy Mount Skokomish, Lake of the Angels in the Valley of Heaven is one of the prettiest alpine lakes in the Olympics. But reaching this divine destination first requires a passage through hell. The trail was laid out by climbers-it's brutally steep and requires use of hands in one short section going over a headwall. It's not dangerous, but hikers skittish on ledges may want to opt for another trail. For those who work hard to get to this celestial setting, expect one of the most dramatic backdrops in the Olympics as your reward.

The views from the trailhead are great, and just get better for the next 1.5 miles as hikers approach the Oregon Butte Lookout as the full expanse of the Wenaha-Tucannon Wilderness unfolds before them in a 360 degree radius.

The Kettle Crest South begins at the White Mountain Trailhead and extends to Sherman Pass, passing by White Mountain, Barnaby Butte, Bald Mountain, Snow Peak, and Sherman Peak along the way.

Pinnacle Saddle resides in the Tatoosh Range, a craggy line of mountains due south of Rainier. This range sits well apart from Mount Rainier and its collection of smaller sibling summits nestled along its flank, but it offers one of the best "Mount Rainier experiences" you'll find. The climb is steep and rugged at times, but the payoff is the best views of the big mountain's south face you'll ever find.

A great exploratory hike to an old coal mining ghost town, with views of the underside of the Fairfax bridge.

With two small lakes and numerous branching trails that sport views to Mount Baker and the Puget Sound, this moderate trail through shady forest can be hiked or backpacked year round. Trails circle both of these lakes, and on nice days you’ll find people out fishing or canoeing here.

First summitted in 1917 by Harry B. Hinman, hikers continue to trek to the summit of  one of the landmark peaks of the Skykomish River Valley via an unofficial trail straight up Mount Persis. Although it lacks the sheer relief of its more well-known neighbor, Mount Index, the peak occupies a commanding position at the foot of the valley. It forms a long rampart with a broad, steep north face rising some 5,000 feet from the valley floor and culminates in innumerable rock faces and buttresses including a 900-foot vertical cliff directly below the summit.

Begin with a walk over a bouncy suspension bridge above the trout-rich waters of the Yakima River. This trail meanders up an ever-narrowing canyon, but it also seems to be a path to the past.

Two miles past Barclay Lake is Eagle Lake. The trail is unmarked but pretty clear and the way is steep.





The Wildcat Trail on Green Mountain follows a disused logging road on a steep, rocky ascent to the peak. Along the way, enjoy views of Hood Canal, the Olympics, and sometimes even downtown Seattle!

Grand views, spectacular spring wildflowers, and easy access make this a great after-work outing or an early spring escape. The route follows an old logging road turned trail up a rock-rimmed mountain, providing hikers a good workout absent crowds.

The lookout that stands on Snider Ridge, high above the Sol Duc Valley, is a replica of the cupola-style fire lookout that operated in the early days of Olympic National Park. Fires are now patrolled by aircraft, but the beautiful, rugged surroundings can still be reviewed by hikers from the lookout with a name that draws on a Chinook phrase that translates to "stand guard".

Just minutes from downtown Everett, Spencer Island sits in the heart of the Snohomish River estuary, a wildlife-rich ecosystem where salt- and freshwater mix. Surrounded by snaking sloughs, this 400-acre island offers a slew of scenic delights, from glistening mudflats to glimpses of snowcapped peaks. And bird-watching opportunities here rank among the best in western Washington.

The Greg Ball Trail is a pure joy to walk. Follow alongside and above the North Fork of the Wallace River, climbing gently and meandering through maturing second growth.

The trail begins at Rainbow Campground and ends at Near Elbo Creek on the northeast side Buck Mountain.

The Boulder Garden Loop offers an opportunity to explore stone giants on a relatively untraveled path, despite its proximity to two of the busiest hiking thoroughfares in the Snoqualmie Pass region. It also is the access route to the Old Mount Si trail, for those who desire a less peopled approach to the Puget Sound region's most well-known hike.

The hike to the summit follows the same trail up to Vesper Lake, but instead of following Vesper Creek upstream to the lake at the creek crossing, cross the creek and follow the existing trails up the southeast slope of Vesper Peak. There are cairns to follow for a nice scramble up to the summit.

Huff and puff up a grueling old miners trail. Brave crashing creek crossings and a steep open hillside choked in jungle greenery before making an Achilles-aching ascent to Headlee Pass, an inconspicuous gap between towering and rocky Morning Star and Sperry peaks. From this portal to past riches, follow a scant path across jumbled talus to beautiful Vesper Lake, sparkling beneath the granite-graced slopes of Vesper Peak. Once the domain of hardscrabble prospectors, Vesper Lake (a.k.a. Lake Elan) now pays scenic dividends to tenacious trekkers.

This secluded hike off I-90 follows the NW ridge through small and then large trees to the top of Humpback mountain.  The summit provides great views in all directions.  This is a great snowshoeing trip in the winter.

Hike through forest, then up steep, open slopes to a magnificent ridge top.

This riverside trail offers no expansive views and doesn't explore any wildflower meadows or high alpine country.  But it does track alongside a beautiful mountain river that sports a healthy population of hungry trout.

Don't expect solitude here- this is perhaps the most heavily used trail on Tiger Mountain, and for good reason. Fortunately, there is plenty of room to share. This close-to-the-city wild land trail provides stunning views, great forestlands, and ample opportunities to see birds and critters. West Tiger- one of the sprawling mountain's four primary peaks (West, Middle, South and East)- is itself a tri-crowned peak. Numbered 1 through 3, the third of the West Tiger peaks offers the best views, despite being the lowest of the triplets.

Hike through meadows nestled more than a mile above sea level, but climb only 500 feet to get there. What could be better? Perhaps meadows punctuated with stunning horizons capped by the snow-clad Mount Rainier. Add in a large resident herd of elk, some pretty doe-eyed mule deer, and a few hundred birds. Too much to ask? Maybe, but that's exactly what you get on Noble Knob.

If you want the best possible views with the shortest hiking dis-tance, this trail is for you. Few 5-mile hikes offer the quality of views you'll find here.

This is a hike up an old mining/logging road that follows beautiful Trout Creek up to the old Sundown Mine.

The tightly clumped spires of Fifes Ridge present a formidable sight from any vantage point, but as you near the rocky ridge it appears ever more menacing and imposing. Perhaps that's partly because the trail you have to hike to get close to the jagged ridge can be menacing and imposing in its own right. Fortunately, the views are worth it--and not just the views at the end of the route. As you climb, the long, broad basin of American River and the sweeping line of American Ridge stretch out before you every time you gain a vantage point, while Fifes Peaks punctuate the skyline above you.

The combination of sprawling meadows, few trails, and virgin forest for cover makes the Palisades Lakes basin a haven for wildlife. This trail is the only one in the vast area between Huckleberry Creek and the White River, and it dead-ends at the lakes' basin.

A broad expanse of meadow blooms with a lovely waterfall and the Goat Rocks looming overhead and Mount Adams close enough to touch to the south.

Hiking the crown jewel of Tiger Mountain State Forest is a rite of passage for serious Issaquah Alps explorers. The trip isn't to be taken lightly, however. It requires a long day and good conditioning. It also requires some planning, as you'll need to arrange for a car at the trail's end. The 16-mile route weaves around or over most of the primary peaks on Tiger, and since it crosses scores of other trails and not all the intersections are well-marked, good routefinding skills are essential.

A popular spot in the heart of the Chuckanut Mountains, little Fragrance Lake makes for a fine destination any time of year. On a well-built hiker-only trail through big timber, the way to Fragrance Lake includes a scenic lookout of Samish Bay and a glistening horizon dotted with islands. Loop back on a gentle old fire road and admire a crashing cascade. And if more exercise and exploration are desired, miles of interconnecting trails will more than satisfy. You won't be without company however-folks from Bellingham flock to this "backyard wilderness."

After loggers and miners punched hastily built roads into the Middle Fork Snoqualmie River valley in the first couple decades of the twentieth century, the area was abandoned until the 1930s, when the Depression-busting programs of FDR came into play. The best known of these was the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), which put unemployed men to work in the woods building trails, national park lodges, and roads. In the 1960s this CCC road was used to give clear-cutting loggers fast access to the Middle Fork's forests. Now that the big timber is mostly gone, the road is reverting to trail, and the forests are regenerating into something hikers can enjoy.

Welcome to the High Divide, an emerald carpet laden with dazzling bouquets draped over a rolling mile-high ridge. Only one problem with this invitation-delivering your reply will be downright demanding. The hike to Welcome Pass is a doozy: 2800 feet of elevation gain in 2.5 miles. And talk about switchbacks. There are more than sixty-count 'em! But once you make the grade, Welcome Pass extends a warm benvenuti and a sincere invite to poke around on the wide-open slopes of the divide, drinking fine views and savoring precious alpine moments.

Kayak Point Park is a lovely saltwater beach park with a short trail system located along the shores of picturesque Port Susan. It's great for family outings by the shore or an easy night of camping.

Hike a gentle trail along a raging river. Perfect for evening and early morning strolls. Perfect for introducing children to the wonders of nature. Perfect for stretching your legs out on the way to Heather Meadows. Perfect for watching diving dippers and daring river kayakers. And perfect for staring into tumultuous rapids. But a terrible place for carrying on a conversation-the river's roar is deafening, its allure oh-so intoxicating.

Short and sweet and a tad bit steep, the hike to the restored Heybrook Lookout makes for a good spring warm-up or late fall frolic, when the surrounding high country is buried deep in snow. From the lookout's lofty balcony, scan the scenic Skykomish Valley, relish the rugged beauty of Ragged Ridge, and stand impressed by Mount Index's imposing facade.

Man-made Baker Lake, with its stump flats, isn't anything spectacular. But that's not the real draw of this trail. The free-flowing Baker River, cascading tributaries, groves of old-growth giants, views of Mounts Baker and Shuksan, and a cool little suspension bridge-those are what will bring you here. And one more thing: this trail can be hiked in any season by just about anyone.

The trail to Lena Lake is a pretty, and popular, weekend destination. But hearty hikers and backpackers who venture to Upper Lena Lake will leave the crowds behind and experience a little bit of nirvana.

A boat ride up Lake Chelan to a summer camp, then a long hike to beautiful remote lakes east of Glacier Peak.

Glorious in autumn when golden larches set the hills aglow and crimson blue-berry bushes light the meadows on fire, this dramatic portal into the North Cascades National Park makes a fine summer destination as well. During those warmer months enjoy alpine floral displays with glacier lilies, phlox, lupine, and paintbrush stealing the show. And while Twisp Pass in itself is a worthy objective, consider pushing farther. Drop down to Dagger Lake or wander a couple of miles of spectacular, open high country to explore polished granite shelves, remote grassy benches, and quiet hidden tarns.

Though the trail is lovely, it's not exactly a thrill--not until you reach the end of the route. There, you'll find yourself swinging on a cable suspension bridge and cooling your heels on an actual glacier.

The Fire and Ice trail is the Mount Baker area's premiere interpretive trail, telling the story of how glaciers and volcanoes shaped this impressive place.

The North Head Trail winds through a lush coastal rainforest of sword ferns and towering Sitka spruce, that is probably very similar to the forests that Lewis and Clark encountered during their visit in 1805. The trail ends at the historic lighthouse keeper’s quarters and a short trail further to spectacular views from the base of the North Head Lighthouse.

Set in the middle of a broad meadow and thin forest, the Chain of Lakes lie strung out like a strand of jewels in Gifford Pinchot National Forest. Sparkling blue-green waters reflect the glacier-covered north face of Mount Adams.

Be prepared for animal encounters--the forest and dense underbrush along the lower sections of this route are perfect cover for a host of critters. Pretty alpine meadows also await you on the flanks of rocky Tinkham Peak; sparkling alpine tarns dot the ridgeline. And if you venture up the side trip to Silver Peak, glorious views from the grassy summit spread out like a picnic buffet before your feet--a veritable feast for the eyes as you look south to the Norse Peak Wilderness, north to the Alpine Lakes Wilderness, west through the gap of Snoqualmie Pass to Granite Mountain, and east into the receding Cascade foothills.



There are two routes up the north side of Silver Star Mountain that in good conditions can be combined to form a sort of loop. Along the way, hikers will be delighted with a diverse array of wildflowers, a natural arch, volcanic views and fine hiking.

Twin Falls run year-round for one very good reason: the area around North Bend receives more than 90 inches of rain each year. Seattle--just 35 miles west--gets half that much. The South Fork Snoqualmie River takes that massive amount of rainfall and puts it to use entertaining hikers. The river squeezes into a narrow rocky gorge before tumbling over a very impressive stairstep falls. Then, when the water has been churned into a frothy torrent, it plunges over a 150-foot rock wall, creating the stunning cascade of the Lower Twin Falls.

Stunning views, stargazing, backcountry lakes and plentiful wildlife await you on this classic 19-mile loop on the Olympic Mountains’ stunning Seven Lakes Basin and High Divide Trail.

This challenging four-mile hike within the Alpine Lakes Wilderness starts at Deception Pass and heads north to Marmot Lake and Lake Clarice.

One of the best meadow-traversing, ridge-walking, view-granting trails in the Skykomish Valley, Johnson Ridge is also surprisingly one of the quieter trails in the region. Sure, it's a long gravel road to the trailhead. And yes, the trail has some steep ups and downs. But the tread is good and the vertical suffering short-lived. Culminating on a peak named Scorpion Mountain, the hike gives a panoramic payoff of jagged peaks and emerald ridges that will leave you momentarily paralyzed.

For a flat riparian ramble or a great workout to a scenic summit, Snow
Mountain Ranch is a walking wonderland just outside of Yakima.

This long but easy valley romp follows boisterous Phelps Creek to a mile-long broad flower-bursting meadow and a giant cirque beneath a formidable wall of towering peaks. But don't expect solitude, for Spider Meadow crawls with backpackers-brigades of them! The valley is large enough to disperse in, though, and Phelps Basin offers a quiet retreat from the meadow's loungers and shutterbugs and their tent cities.

Mount Si should be experienced at least once by every hiker. In fact, a significant number of Puget Sound residents do just one hike per year, and these annual hikers almost invariably turn to Mount Si every time. In the early spring, mountain-loving backpackers and climbers use the trail as a tune-up for the coming season. Others come because the trail is one of few that becomes snow-free early in the year. And Si's payoff is incredible: views of the Upper Snoqualmie Valley, the Puget Sound basin, and far beyond.

A high alpine basin full of lakes, larch, mountain goats, and fantastically stark granite that is considered by many to be the best hike in the state.  Options abound - plenty of places to camp, side trails, summits, and more ensure that you will be wishing you had marked a few extra days on your backpacking permit!

Waterfowl and upland bird hunters take advantage of this area in late autumn and winter, but hikers can take advantage of the seasonal road closure (usually closed March through November) to enjoy solitary rambles on the old road. Spring is the best time to visit as you'll likely find the local desert full of migratory songbirds and the lake alive with nesting waterfowl. You might also happen across coyotes, badgers, deer, and snakes.

The wide sandy beaches of Kalaloch are the perfect introduction to the wild Olympic Coast. Although the highway is never far, towering bluffs and hidden coves give this area a remote feeling. Perfect for children and Rover too (dogs are allowed on these beaches, but they must be leashed), spend days exploring this area's extensive tide pools and headlands. The hike to Browns Point, a jumbled collection of rock islands and surf-splashed cliffs, makes a fine half-day objective.

A good hike any time of year, the trail is perfect for beating summer heat, enjoying winter rain, savoring autumn color, or being wooed by waterfalls that are swollen with spring rain. One thing about this trail remains constant: the trees. Whatever the season, you'll travel through a forest that has defied time. Boulder River's moss-draped giants represent one of the last remaining large, low-country old-growth forests in the Cascades. Protected within the nearly 49,000-acre Boulder River Wilderness, these ancient trees are as impressive as the wild river they embrace.

Big trees and wetlands define this new 793-acre wildlife area near Woodinville. This is the headwaters of the Bear Creek watershed, a highly productive salmon stream within the Sammamish River Valley.

Spokane’s Centennial Trail started as a pedestrian- and bike-friendly route along the Spokane River, coinciding with the Washington State Centennial celebration, hence the name. Now, users can follow the Spokane River from Riverside State Park west of Spokane all the way to the Idaho border.

Catherine Creek is an area of unique natural beauty and is of great botanical significance. Over ninety species of wildflowers can be found in the area, from grass widow, which blankets the ground as early as February, to western ladies' tresses, which may bloom into July.

This 8.25 mile loop on the sunny Washington side of the Columbia River Gorge gradually climbs through shaded stands of oak and ponderosa pine, dotted with small, wildflower-strewn meadows, then deposits hikers 1900’ above the river at the top of a basalt ridge with expansive views and carpets of balsamroot and lupine. - UPATED: The user created trail that passed through private lands at the base of the cliff has been closed by the Forest Service. Please respect the Closure.

Hike a short and to-the-point trail to an isolated peak on the fringe of the Olympics. Enjoy views out over glistening Puget Sound, with its ferries and Seattle skyline. But there's more. From Zion's summit follow a ridgeline trail to a series of ledges, a promised land of sweeping views of lofty Mount Townsend and the towering and jagged Gray Wolf Ridge. Make a pilgrimage in June and be rewarded with a kingdom of brilliantly blooming rhodo-dendrons.

The Snow Lakes sit in one of the most spectacular basins within the entire Cascade Range-the largest of the legendary Enchantment Lakes, sparkling gems surrounded by spiraling walls of rock adorned with jagged turrets. Mostly the domain of backpackers, the Snows can be reached by strong day hikers. The Enchantments are popular, how-ever, and in order to limit impact on this fragile and special environment the Forest Service has implemented a strict set of rules for visitation, including a quota system for overnighters. Day hikers limit themselves, primarily because of the long approach and stiff climb.

With more than 600 acres of rolling fields, pine-forested buttes and wetlands, the Slavin Conservation Area provides plenty of room to stretch legs all year-round.

Big trees, a wilderness valley flourishing with wildlife, and no crowds. The peninsula's wildest rainforest valleys are up the Queets River, and many a hiker has never ventured into this enchanting corner of Olympic National Park. The main deterrent is accessibility, both to and on the trail. The gravel 14-mile Queets River Road can often be agonizing to drive. And once you reach the trailhead, you'll find there's no bridge over the river! This keeps more than a handful of adventurers from ambling up the trail. But if you persist you're guaranteed a lonesome journey.

Climb a prominent peak on the western edge of the Olympic Mountains. From this 4000-plus-foot aerie above the saturated Quinault Valley, stare down upon sprawling rain forest. Enjoy an unobstructed view of shimmering Lake Quinault too, and from Mount Olympus to the Pacific take in an ocean of peaks and peek at the ocean. It's a tough climb to this rugged outpost on the periphery of the Olympics, but the panorama it provides is a worthy pursuit.

To the base of Explorer Falls, also known as Wheeler Falls, is an easy hike up a gravel road that borders the Lake Chaplain Watershed. It is also the trailhead to Easy Pass to Echo Lake.

This short half-mile interpretive nature loop is an excellent introduction to the Olympic's temperate rain forest. Hiking clockwise, the first 850 feet is barrier-free and accessible to individuals in wheelchairs.

On a stretch of Washington coast known for its beach-driving, Griffiths-Priday State Park is a welcome respite for walkers. The natural spit features low sand dunes that are protected as a wildlife refuge bordered by Conner Creek on one side and the Copalis River on the other.

A six-mile, paved urban loop that connects pocket parks and multi-use paths around Lake Union in Seattle. If you don't stop for a bite to eat in one of the neighborhoods along the way, Gasworks Park (on the north side of the loop) and Lake Union Park (on the south side) both make great picnic spots with lake views.

This trail combines the serene beauty of the Little Wenatchee River valley with the thrilling vistas found on the high benches of Wenatchee Ridge.

Rock climbers use the first half of this trail to get to the rock faces on the east end of Little Si. Hikers use the full trail to sweep around the west end and climb the tall knob on the easier (though still a bit rocky) route. Like its big sibling, Mount Si, Little Si offers phenomenal views of the Upper Snoqualmie Valley after a nice hike through forests and over rocks. The trail is steep initially, then mellow, then steep again as it scrambles straight up the northern spine to the 1576-foot summit.

Paralleled by a busy recreational road for much of its length, the frothing, tumbling, spectacularly beautiful Icicle Creek flows unmolested in deep wilderness at its upper reaches. The upper Icicle is more sedate than its canyon run downriver, trading heart-pounding rapids for soul-soothing ripples, steep, stark walls for lush flats of luxuriant old-growth forest, pavement for trail. A great hike for late spring, late fall, or lazy summer days, the upper Icicle invites outdoor adventurers of all levels.

Follow a babbling brook through forests of pine and fields of dazzling wildflowers to a long-gone lookout site where the viewing still reigns supreme. Gaze out at beautiful landscapes near and far-from verdant lawns spread out directly below, to the glistening ice of Glacier Peak, to the sun-baked wheat fields of the Waterville Plateau. Heavenly? Yes. But only before the motors arrive or during the week, when chances are slim that one will come sputtering by.

Rising 1 mile above the surrounding countryside and perched on the western edge of the Cascades, Pilchuck packs some of the best panoramic viewing to be found in these parts. From its historical and restored fire lookout, scan the horizon - from Rainier to Baker, Glacier Peak to the Olympics, Seattle to the San Juans - and every jagged, rugged, and snow-capped peak lining the Mountain Loop Highway. One of the most popular hikes in Washington, Pilchuck is a "social mountain." Expect company and enjoy the camaraderie.

One of the finest viewing outposts in the Chiwawa region, Carne Mountain will leave your head spinning as you try to identify a seemingly infinite array of peaks spread out before you: from close-ups of Maude, mighty matron of the Entiat Range, all the way to Stuart and the Enchantments. And valleys too! Peer straight down into gorgeous emerald allies housing roaring waterways. The trail is well built, albeit steep. An excellent alpine choice in early summer-come for the wildflowers. Or miss the floral show and arrive later for the larch production, which receives golden praise year after year.

Perfect for a winter leg-stretcher or a spring woodland flower hike, this easy trail will appeal to most hikers, young and old. Through groves of old-growth conifers, over cascading creeks, and hugging the lush banks of the Gray Wolf River, the trail marches up a quiet canyon in the Buckhorn Wilderness. Plenty of good picnic sites, too, can be found along the tumbling, churning river. And there's always an excellent chance of spotting a big critter along the way.

A pretty little waterfall popular with the summer masses or a lonely valley coveted by those seeking solitude and old-growth splendor-it's your choice. From a secluded valley tucked between Mount Storm King and the Aurora Ridge, Barnes Creek winds its way down to Lake Crescent. Falls Creek tumbles down the steep slopes of Aurora Peak, ultimately as Marymere Falls in a damp glen just above Barnes Creek. Two diverse waterways, two diverse hikes, two diverse experiences. Of course, you can always hike them both.

Whispering stands of cottonwoods shine against the brilliantly polarized eastern Washington blue sky, while cool blue pools reflect their graceful beauty.

These beautiful lakes are nestled in a green bowl beneath high, craggy peaks. You might encounter a few elk, maybe a mountain goat or two, and possibly even a black bear.

An uninspiring name for a pretty tarn tucked beneath the impressive Early Winters Spires. Short and sweet, this trail will leave you sitting by Blue's shimmering waters in no time. From a shoreline resting post marvel at the surrounding soaring walls of granite. Listen for clambering climbers scaling them. Despite the occasional clanking of carabiners, Blue Lake is a peaceful place above the busy state highway.

Ever wanted to hike the Wonderland Trail, but have time for only a sneak peek?  Here’s how to enjoy a sampling of the Wonderland’s spectacular scenery—in a single day!

This 28-mile round trip offers the best of the Columbia Highlands as it passes through old-growth ponderosa pine stands, skirts five significant peaks in the Kettle Range, and showcases the effects of the White Mountain Fire of 1988.

Simply spectacular! One of the finest hikes on the face of the planet, the trail to Hidden Lake Peaks grants continuous sensory overload. Sprawling meadows bursting with wildflowers, granite slabs and boulders laced with heather, glistening snowfields birthing tumbling waters, alpine nooks providing refuge to ptarmigans and pipits, a historical fire lookout, and views-stunning, mouth-gaping views of a serrated skyline of snow, ice, and rock. It doesn't get any better than this.

Start high, stay high, and enjoy the endless bounty of the wild country between the Cascade Crest and the dry, open deserts of eastern Washington. Tronsen Ridge provides a little of both worlds.

From a popular campground off of a busy highway, escape the commotion in a hidden little canyon along the Big Quilcene River, shielded from the outside world as if in deep wilderness. Enjoy the serenading river's rapids and in springtime enjoy a floral show of blossoming lilies, honeysuckle, and rhododendrons. Fallsview Canyon makes a great evening hike if camping nearby, or a nice break from the road if traveling by.

Take five days (or seven!) and enjoy some of the best backcountry in the state on this long loop hike. Along the way, you'll see massive wildflower meadows, glaciers, alpine lakes, high mountain passes and supreme views of Glacier Peak.

Its size and splendor make Palouse Falls one of the most scenic and impressive waterfalls in all of Washington, but its location adds even more magic and wonder to its image.

An Olympic classic-bag this peak for one of the most supreme views this side of Hood Canal. From the jagged summit peer deep into the heart of the Olympic wilderness or out across Lake Cushman and Puget Sound to the Cascades spanning the eastern horizon. All of this comes at a price, however-the trail to Ellinor is steep and tough.

Boulder Cave formed over millions of years from ongoing volcanic action and erosion. Today the cave is home to a dwindling population of Pacific western big-eared bats (a.k.a. Townsend bats), a listed sensitive species in both Washington and Oregon. Only fifty remain of thousands that inhabited the cave in the 1920s and '30s, hence the cave's winter closure to ensure a safe hibernation period. Do bring a reliable light source for exploring the cave.

The Hummocks are massive mounds of rock, ash, and mud that were piled unceremoniously around the floor of the new Coldwater Lake valley by the mighty blow. But these aren't just piles of rubble. Some of the hummocks tower 500 feet into the air and cover a once-grand ancient forest.

After the first mile, you'll climb relentlessly, for much of the way in dense forests with few or no views. But the payoff for this thigh-burning, lung-tearing workout: incredible vistas from atop one of the highest peaks on the easternmost flank of the Goat Rocks.

Steamboat Rock is a massive "island" of a rock mountain floating on the shore of Banks Lake. The durable rock was left behind through all of the Great Missoula Floods and was later nearly surrounded by the waters diverted by the Grand Coulee Dam. The top of the rock is a broad, flat plateau offering stunning views across the scablands of coulee country.

This is a steep, rocky trail leading up past a pair of pretty waterfalls, to a high peak on the western end of the Columbia River Gorge. The views are unmatched: Mount Hood is so close it could almost be touched.

It seems impossible: Finding quiet solitude on a backcountry trail leading through ancient cathedral forests and past magnificent waterfalls less than a hour from Seattle. Yet the Taylor River Trail offers just that. While nearby Mount Si bristles with sweating hikers, and the Middle Fork Snoqualmie Trail hosts hordes of outdoor enthusiasts, the Taylor River Trail--an old road that's been reclaimed by the forest--goes largely unnoticed and unused.

The worst part of this moderate climb is knocked off in the first few miles. After that, the trail rambles along a beautiful, rugged ridge to the west flank of 7487-foot Johnson Peak before turning sharply south to intercept the Angry Mountain Trail.

If you're looking for a quick way to get away from the car and into Mount Rainier's alpine splendor, this is your express lane to ecstasy. The Sourdough Ridge Trail, which begins in the thick of the tourist-choked Sunrise visitor center, leaves it all fairly quickly, climbing to a ridge top and turning east beneath Antler Peak. Kids love the open views and general abundance of marmots.

The trail atop Burroughs Mountain provides hikers outstanding views of the northeast face of Mount Rainier. Little Tahoma can be seen flanking Rainier, and the tower-topped peak of Mount Fremont stands to the north. Closer at hand, marmots and pikas dash between the rocks along the trail. Mountain goats can be found showing off their agility on the sides of the local peaks. And raptors--from lightning-fast peregrines to massive golden eagles--soar overhead. All in all, the views and the local wildlife make this loop an unbeatable day hiking option for hikers young and old.

Gem Lake is nestled at the foot of Wright Mountain and is about two miles beyond the trail junction at Rock Creek trail #1013.1 that intersects with the Snow Lake trail starting at Alpental.  Beautiful colors surround the lake in autumn as do the many climbable peaks in the area.

Crossing through the stunning Alpine Lakes wilderness, this section is a must-do for serious Washington backpackers. This 75-mile section leads through some of the most beautiful, remote and diverse surroundings along the PCT.

Surrounded by a rugged topography cloaked in ancient forest, the setting is as wild as any along the Mountain Loop Highway, except for one noticeable difference. North and Independence lack the crowds that inundate nearby backcountry lakes.

Holden Lake is set in a fantastic glacial basin, with stunning views of Bonanza, the highest non-volcanic peak in Washington State.

The most famous of all the Olympic rain forests, the Hoh is one of the busiest places in Olympic National Park. A visitors center and a couple of well-groomed nature trails attract bus loads of admirers from Seattle to Seoul, Boston to Berlin. And its not just camera-toting tourists that invade this valley; pan-toting backpackers and caribiner-clanking climbers flock here too. The Hoh River Trail also provides access to Mount Olympus and the High Divide. But who can blame all of these people for coming here? The Hoh rain forest truly is one of the world's most spectacular places.

Eightmile is a gorgeous, big backcountry lake ideal for quick escapes when the thermometer is pushing 100 in the Wenatchee Valley. But get an early start to beat the heat. The first half of this hike traverses an open burn zone that'll leave you scorched by the sun. Plop yourself down on a shore-line rock and soak up the soothing backdrop of Eightmile Mountain, which is oft-reflected in the lake's placid waters.

In many ways, you never recover from your first walk into Spray Park. The trail isn't difficult to follow. It's just difficult to forget. The 3.5-mile walk leads to seemingly endless open meadows of heather and alpine blossoms that tease the nose, ease the mind, and tickle the imagination.

Starting in valley-bottom meadows, you'll enjoy open country start to finish. Oh, you'll dip into stands of trees now and again, but for the most part you'll be surrounded by wildflowers, alpine grasses, and low bushes.

A .3 mile, barrier-free trail through towering ancient Douglas fir and Western red cedar that is ideal for hikers of all ages and abilities. It is rated difficult for wheelchair users due to some short sections that have up to 12% grade. Most of the trail however is less than 5% grade.

Tucked in tight folds, big basins, and rocky cirques high above the West Fork Foss River are a bevy of big, beautiful alpine lakes-one of the highest concentrations of alpine lakes in the entire Alpine Lakes Wilderness, actually. You can spend days here, and many do, but day hiking to several of these aquatic gems isn't out of the question. Just prepare for a tough slog over rough terrain. And prepare for some of the finest alpine scenery this side of Stevens Pass.

The Tarbell trail is a 24.75 mile loop that connects recreation sites and scenic viewpoints in the Yacolt Burn Recreation area.

Cross-country skiers and snowshoers have long enjoyed Mount Catherine, but hikers have pretty much ignored this Snoqualmie Pass peak since the middle of the twentieth century.

Sometimes, you hike the steep trails to get the best possible views. Other times, you hike the steep trails just because they are steep. McClellan Butte hikers generally fall into this later category. The trail is steep and physically demanding, while the views are less spectacular than you'll find on other nearby trails. But folks flock to this wonderful trail, using it as a warm-up for more serious alpine adventures later in the year. And unlike other "training" hills (Mount Si and Granite Mountain, for instance), McClellan Butte doesn't draw hundreds of people every day in the spring and summer. You're not going to hike in solitude, of course (every trail in the I-90 corridor draws weekend boot traffic), but you might only see a few other people as you sweat your way to the summit.

The Lower Dungeness Trail travels through mostly conifer forests high above the river with a fair bit of elevation gain for a river hike.

The Big Quilcene Trail to Marmot Pass is one of the most popular trails in the Olympic National Forest. What many hikers don't realize is that it was once twice as long. The road delivering them to the trailhead severed it in two. Good news, though, the entire trail still exists, the eastern 6 miles now known as the Lower Big Quilcene Trail. And although not in the Buckhorn Wilderness, it's still quite wild in places. Much of the route runs through a rugged canyon cloaked in primeval forest. And while past logging has eaten away at the periphery, plenty of ancient groves grace the way.

Intimate ice is what this hike is all about. Follow a well-trodden path to the scoured world of the Coleman Glacier, the largest of Baker's dozen-plus glaciers. From along a steep heap of lateral moraine, stare down into a cavernous abyss of ice and compacted snow. Locate blue grottos in the crevasses of Baker's frozen icing. Come in July for the lilies, September for the berries, October for the quiet, but don't try this hike early in the season. The creeks are unbridged and are difficult enough to negotiate in dry periods.

Rugged coastal headlands, placid coves, tidal pools teeming with crusty critters, towering ancient evergreens, and breathtaking views of the Olympic Mountains-Deception Pass State Park packs it in. And with waterfront campsites and easy access from Pugetopolis, it's easy to see why Deception Pass is Washington's most popular state park (over three million annual visitors). This hike samples the park's rugged northern headlands, delivering spectacular views of straits and bays and of Deception Pass itself, with its treacherous waters and majestic bridge.

All congregants of nature are invited to attend this Church. But hallelujah, it's a tough calling! While the trail is built well, it switchbacks like there's no tomorrow. The scenery is heavenly, but with over 3700 vertical feet to climb there's a little hell to pay on the way. It's worth the sacrifice, though. From the old lookout site just beneath Church Mountain's impressive steeple-like summit, a promised land of North Cascades beauty abounds.

An easy hike on an old railroad bed, this oft-overlooked trail serves up plenty of surprises. Travel alongside the Wild and Scenic Sauk River, admiring eagles, mergansers, and kingfishers. Watch dippers flit on river rocks. Listen to thrushes bring the surrounding forest alive in song. Pause on open banks to take in sweeping views of surrounding peaks. Marvel at ancient giant cedars. Locate relics of past logging and railroading activity. And of course enjoy the wildlife-rich wetland known as Beaver Lake.

Theses caves are long tunnels in the thick lava beds; they run roughly parallel to the surface of the land. Interpretive signs line both the trail through the forest and the tubes' mouths.

Follow the Little Wenatchee River all the way to its headwaters high on the Cascade crest. From mile-high, miles-long alpine meadows, the river meanders. And so will you upon reaching these heavenly flower gardens. The hike in is a long approach and is warm at times across brushy avalanche slopes, but it is worth every ounce of sweat expended and every annoying fly swatted.

Steep, hot, and dusty is an accurate description of this hike up the western edge of the Monte Cristo Range, but the views from the summit of Little Huckleberry Mountain are astoundingly beautiful. And don't be fooled by the name-there is nothing little about the big, juicy huckleberries you gobble down while plodding along the ridge trail.

Nice forested access through the Maple Valley region.  Allows a hike with easy access if you don't have a car.  Area serviced by bus routes (143, 168, 912).  The trail has off shoots to Lake Wilderness, The Lake Wilderness Arboretum, and the Maple Valley Community Center, as well as others.

Enjoy an easy, kid-friendly near-level woodland stroll around one of the largest lakes in the San Juans or a heart-pounding ascent up the islands' highest point. From Mount Constitution's unique stone tower savor stunning views of snow-capped peaks and emerald islands spanning from British Columbia's Garibaldi all the way to Rainier. After fawning and awing, walk along the edge of precipitous cliffs gazing at the twinkling waters of Mountain Lake 1000-feet below. This is the heart of Moran State Park, and when it comes to pure scenery, wildlife observations, and top-notch trails, you'll be hard-pressed to find an area surpassing this.

Hike to the northwesternmost point in the continental United States. Here, where the Strait of Juan de Fuca meets the Pacific, Cape Flattery protrudes into a sea of tumultuous waters. A land of dramatic headlands, sea stacks, and deep narrow coves, Cape Flattery exhibits sheer rugged beauty. Scores of seabirds ride the surf and scavenge the sea stacks. Watch for whales and sea lions too. And the sunsets... they're simply divine.

Savvy hikers seeking stellar 360-degree views know to look for lookouts. The old fire lookout cabins (sometimes cabins-atop-towers) used by the Forest Service in the pre-satellite radar days were always situated atop high peaks with outstanding views in all directions.

In spring and early summer, the flowers are so profuse and beautiful that you would think that a gardener had planted them. And because this area is usually clear of snow long before many others in the region, hikers can attain Iron Bear Pass and the Teanaway Ridge and views of the Stuart Range and Mount Rainier while much of the Cascades is still snowed in.

A primitive trail that climbs steeply to connect the Trapper Creek Trail (#192) to the Observation Trail (#132).

This trail leads through small meadows, old fir forest, and huckleberry patches along the Spring Creek valley, before taking you on a moderate climb to the summit of the large, forested peak of Green Mountain.

Venture into a deep wilderness valley shadowed by craggy pinnacles of the Stuart Range and the Wenatchee Mountains' broad flank of summits. Located in one of the largest roadless valleys in the Central Cascades, Ingalls Creek drains a vast area of rugged and stunning beauty. Continuously following the wilderness waterway, let rapids and ripples, crashing cascades and swirling eddies mesmerize you along the way. Come in spring and enjoy a trail lined with flowers-paintbrush, lupine, trillium, glacier lilies, and more.

Dry, dusty, deeply rutted, and dominated by motorcycles - why bother, right?  How about knockout views from Glacier Peak to the Columbia River?  One of the largest and finest old-growth ponderosa pine forests in the entire state?  An amazing array of dazzling wildflowers?  And wildlife - this is the only hike in Washington where I've encountered a bobcat!  Just come on a weekday, or early in the season when patches of snow prohibit the trail from becoming a motorway.

Often free of snow as early as April, this excellent early season hike offers hikers what they have been missing for months: a good chance of sun (this being the sunny side of the Cascades, a bountiful array of wildflowers, and stunning views of Tumwater and Icicle Canyon, the Wenatchee and Icicle rivers and surrounding mountains.

From Mount Finlayson, marvel at an undeveloped coastline spread out below you. Stare across the Strait of Juan de Fuca at a backdrop of snowy Olympic Mountain summits. Watch for eagles, plovers, sandpipers, and hawks. Enjoy one of the most spectacular settings in all of the San Juans.

This hike is sometimes called Last Promontory; Absolute Last Promontory and starts out as a road walk on the CCC road; then climbs another road to a viewpoint east of the Green Mt summit.  From here the route is a very rough trail or scramble route directly up the ridge line to the summit.

This section of the 2600-mile Pacific Crest Trail (PCT) seems tailor-made for kids and dogs. It's gentle, scenic, and easily accessible, with a great swimming lake, resilient grassy meadows for romping, and easy off-trail scrambles. All this and more awaits hikers willing to share the trail with a lot of fellow nature lovers and the occasional bear. The area is also popular with a host of bird and animal species, including deer, mountain goats, hawks, falcons, marmots, martens, chipmunks, and the ever-faithful friend of hikers, gray jays.

Rugged and spectacular-yes. Gothic, perhaps, for this stark and mysterious basin harbors hidden tarns and disappearing waterways and is surrounded by spiraling peaks. A difficult hike on steep and rocky terrain, Gothic Basin with all its rich beauty can't keep hikers away; just as it couldn't keep miners away a century ago with its lure of riches. It was those hardy folk who built this path. It has been upgraded since-somewhat. The splendor of the basin, however, can't be improved one bit. Past glaciers and the agents of erosion have left it pretty darn near to perfect.

Hike to an old mining town by ambling up a long-closed road along the South Fork Sauk River and largely sticking to the old route taken by miners over a century ago.

The route to Camp Muir is long, strenuous, and very susceptible to poor weather. But it can also be incredibly beautiful, with views that can't be found anywhere else.

The Klickitat Trail is a 31-mile rails-to-trails conversion managed by Columbia Hills State Park. This linear park goes from Lyle to Warwick (on the Lyle-Centerville Highway) with several access points along the way. This Hiking Guide entry describes the route between Lyle and Pitt Road.

This region south of the Columbia River sits at the northwesternmost part of the Hanford Reach. Priest Rapids Dam blocks the flow of the river just to the northwest, around a gentle bend in the river.

Bald eagles, icons of the mossy forests and deep rivers of the Pacific Coast, flock to this desert canyon each winter, and their presence is reason to visit in winter.

Ray Westberg was the popular wrestling coach in Ellensburg who died in 1997 at the young age of 47. This trail was built and dedicated to him, with a memorial placed at the high point on the ridge. The route isn't heavily used by hikers, but it is popular with birds--birds on the ground and in the air.

Want a walk through a gorgeous winter wonderland without a sweaty climb up a steep trail? This route offers all the beauty and majesty found in the wintry mountains without the strenuous workout usually required to see such splendor. It is perfect for taking the family on a gentle snowshoe stroll or for introducing newbies to the joys of snowshoeing.

The 134-mile-long Columbia Plateau Trail (also called the Pasco/Fish Lake Trail) followed the old, historic route of the Spokane--Portland--Seattle Railroad from Pasco to Spokane. The trail today is a fabulous way to experience the human and natural history of this unique landscape.

Enjoy an easy loop in the Queets River valley without having to ford the river. Saunter along an open bank above the wild Queets, hike under some of the largest spruce trees in the park, and look for resident elk while traversing old homestead farms. The Sams River Loop is ideal for introducing children to the rain forest. Unlike nature trails at the Quinault and Hoh, you'll have this entire living classroom for yourselves.

You'll work up a sweat on this easy to moderate hike to the spectacular Teneriffe Falls (formerly Kamikaze Falls). Go in the spring when the tread is snow-free and the waterfall is flowing at full volume. Along the way, you'll be rewarded with views of the surrounding Snoqualmie valley and nearby peaks. With limited parking at the trailhead, this trail doesn’t get too crowded. It's a nice alternative to neighboring Little Si and Mt. Si if you are looking for a quiet hike near North Bend.

In an area of spectacular alpine lakes, Trout rates as so-so. At this lake, tucked in a wooded basin with limited views of Eightmile Mountain's craggy ridges, you won't be oohing and ahhing from its grassy shoreline. But if it's peaceful wanderings you seek, Trout won't let you down. The forest is attractive, and both Jack and Trout creeks add musical scores to it. There are some good views, too, out to Icicle Ridge, and in October stands of western larch stain the slopes bright yellow.

Set in a granite bathtub beneath spiraling peaks dabbed with shimmering strings of glacial ice, Colchuck ranks as one of the most beautiful alpine lakes in all of Washington. And one of the most popular too! Can you resist the lure of Colchuck's sparkling cobalt waters? Or being mesmerized by her glacial-scoured surroundings that appear right out of the High Sierra? I didn't think so. But before joining the boot-beating brigade, be forewarned. The hike isn't easy. It involves a knee knocking ascent over some pretty steep and rocky terrain.

The section of the Pacific Crest Trail (PCT) north of Snoqualmie Pass is overrun with hikers every summer weekend, but put a few feet of snow on the trail, and the crowds ignore it. That's great news for snowshoers because the trail is easy to get to and enjoyable for snowshoeing.

The East Crater Trail is one of the more popular entry points into the Indian Heaven Wilderness and a connector to the Pacific Crest Trail.

A land of immense natural beauty teetering on the extreme eastern end of the North Cascades, Horseshoe Basin has long been a favorite destination for backpackers. With sprawling alpine tundra, shimmering tarns, a half-dozen wide-open, easy-to-scramble summits, and spectacular wildlife observing, it's no wonder visitors prefer to spend days here. But Horseshoe Basin's fairly easy approach and gentle terrain make it a dead ringer for day hikers too. You won't be able to experience it all. But you'll get a nice taste-and by traveling lightly in this precious area you'll leave less of an impact than all of those backpackers.

One of the most popular hikes off of the Mountain Loop Highway, the Mount Dickerman Trail delivers jaw-slacking views of a ring of rugged peaks near and far. Big Four and Del Campo practically leap out at you, while Glacier mesmerizes off in the distance. Though well-built and well-maintained, the trail is not easy. It starts low and heads high, wasting little time on the way to the 5723-foot summit. Come in September and Dickerman's legendary blueberry patches will slow your momentum even more than the steep trail. You'll likely end up looking like an "indigo girl"with all your picking and sampling.

The trail climbs through some of the most spectacular wildflower meadows in the state, and presents some of the most wonderful views a hiker could imagine. Volcanoes loom on all sides: Mount Rainier, Mount Adams, Mount St. Helens, and on clear days, even Mount Hood can be seen far to the south.

Hike through a deep green ravine sliced by a salmon-spawning stream in Lynnwood of all places. But there's more; finish at a quiet Puget Sound beach with sweeping views of Whidbey Island and the Olympic Mountains. Lunds Gulch forms a green swath in heavily suburbanized south Snohomish County. Protected within the 105-acre Meadowdale County Park, Lunds Gulch is not only a refuge to area wildlife, but also to area residents.

A short but strenuous climb to a high alpine lake, buried deep in snow, is what awaits snowshoers here. The length of the trail and the steepness with which it climbs are secondary considerations, however, for snowshoers will find an inordinate amount of natural beauty and winter wilderness on this trail.

Though this land is called a "wildlife area," it could as easily be named a state wildflower area. On any given spring day, hikers can expect to see an array of wildflowers that puts the pretty alpine meadows to shame.

There are two ways to attain Fourth of July Pass - from Thunder Creek or from Panther Creek. Both offer wonderful opportunities to travel along burbling, blue-green creeks. And both offer excellent views of the North Cascades and camping possibilities. Go out and back or stash a second car and do a traverse.

In a park where more than a few valleys can vie for the name "grand", this one is the grand contender. A necklace of sparkling alpine lakes adorning bold mountain faces spans this mile-high valley. Wildflowers, old growth, alpine tundra, deer, marmots, bear-they're all here in this outdoor cathedral. Your ticket into this wild kingdom comes at minimal cost-the trail is mostly downhill on a good grade, though you do pay the piper on the way out on a grueling ascent. But it's all worth it.

Sure you have to cross ski slopes and a powerline swath, not exactly wild country. But views are good and at the end of the disturbances is true wilderness. You'll get to explore a quiet little tarn and a big sparkling lake set in a cirque at the head of the Icicle Creek valley. And most of the way is along the Pacific Crest Trail, allowing you to sample one of the most famous long-distance hiking trails in the country.

The Katwalk offers a remarkable hiking experience--striding on a narrow shelf hundreds of feet in the air. The trail, blasted into the cliff face by dynamite crews hanging suspended from ropes, is perfectly safe once the winter's snow has completely melted off. There is, of course, more to this hike than the just the Katwalk. The Pacific Crest Trail (PCT) climbs from Snoqualmie Pass through old-growth forests, dances through a log-littered avalanche slope (a perfect place to see just how powerful an avalanche can be), and traverses broad, steep-sloped wildflower meadows.

Crowds abate once past Denny Creek's waterfalls--the hordes thinning to a respectable number of serious hikers looking for an alpine lake experience. And what an experience! The trail finally crests Hemlock Pass and descends moderately to Melakwa Lake, a broad alpine wonder with rocky slopes leading straight down into the crystal water. Those bright waters also reflect the craggy peaks that ring the lake: Chair and Kaleetan Peaks, most notably.

Hiking through a wide, level valley in the shadow of looming Kendall Peak to the north and Rampart Ridge to the east would be an ideal outing, if only so many people didn't know about it. Fortunately, a few miles up the trail, the crowds thin--or at least spread out--and snowshoers can get on with the business of learning to travel in a beautiful wilderness valley.

The route to Camp Muir gives hearty hikers a small taste of what alpine climbers experience. The trail stretches high up the flank of Rainier, toward the upper mountain where alpine climbers play. This route isn't for everyone since it does entail substantial snow travel and may require good routefinding skills. But on a clear summer day, hikers in excellent physical condition might consider this most strenuous trek into the world of rock and ice.

You won't find better views anywhere else this close to Seattle. Rattlesnake Ledge is a monolithic block of rock on the eastern end of Rattlesnake Ridge, towering high over the cool waters of Rattlesnake Lake and the Snoqualmie River valley. Looking up from the trailhead, the site is daunting--the rock face looks sheer and impregnable. Fortunately, the cliff face isn't too broad, and hearty Washington Trails Association volunteers have carved a path through the steep forests flanking the rock face.

Hiking American Ridge to American Lake you may find yourself feasting in the same huckleberry fields Douglas himself once enjoyed.

This canyon is stunning! It offers black basalt talus slopes below steep cliffs, hillsides of brilliant wildflowers, and an array of birds. That's right: Bird lovers, take note. This is an avian paradise. In addition to the ever-present raptors that soar above virtually all desert country, Black Canyon boasts stunning populations of mourning doves and western kingbirds. You'll also find grouse, Hungarian partridge, and chukar.

This is one of the most scenic, most accessible (including for kids, at least to the pass), and not surprisingly the most crowded high-country romps in the North Cascades-and the only trailhead in the 684,000-acre North Cascades National Park that you can drive to. Mixed in with the throngs of Puget Sound hikers are folks from Munich, Tokyo, and Kalamazoo. And none of them return disappointed after frolicking among fields of flowers, peaks of ice, and boulders bearing basking marmots-some of the most outstanding alpine landscapes to be found anywhere in the world.

An easy hike to one of the Olympic Coast's famed wilderness beaches. Walk the wide sandy beach to the foot of a waterfall tumbling from a towering bluff right into the crashing surf. Feeling more energetic? Leave the crowds behind by grunting over Taylor Point to a secluded beach flanked by steep sea stacks and flower pot islands.

The condition of the trail to Rachel Lake and the lake's environs exhibit what can happen when too many nature-loving hikers are unleashed on a fragile landscape. Though you'll enjoy spectacular views at the lake and en route, closer examination reveals a web of way trails stomped into the fragile meadows around the lake. And heavy use and poor trail planning have left the trail in rough condition. You'll splash up a track marred by mud and water, with seasonal streams running down the middle of the trail at times.

Hall Mountain offers peekaboo views out to wide valleys. Distant rolling hills along the first portion of this mellow trail lead to beautiful grassy meadows along the upper part of the trail. The last mile or two are all meadows, sprinkled with sage, aspen and wildflowers. Views from the top stretch into Idaho and Canada over miles of valleys and enough distant ridge lines to wander for days.

Stroll first through deep forest, then up, up, and away to an alpine world flush in meadows, larches, and delectable views of stark craggy mountains spiraling to the heavens. From the pass, a broad saddle teetering on the demarcation zone between the wet west and the dry east, there are exploratory side-trip options. And while this section of the Pacific Crest Trail usually teems with fellow hikers, it's never shy of wild critters. With everything from frantic ground squirrels, to lumbering bears, to wallowing mountain goats, you'll feel like you've walked onto the set of Wild America.

Depending on the starting snow elevation, this may be a wonderful day hike in wide meadows or a long, overnight trek through forests before reaching those alpine clearings. Regardless, this route is a jewel for winter enthusiasts.

This lesser known trail starts in the Mount Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest and then enters the northeast corner of the park, is snow-free early in the season and goes through some amazing old growth.

Grand views await you here, as Crystal Peak stands between the stunning spires of the Norse Peak Wilderness and the mighty summit of Mount Rainier's northeastern flank.

If you want views from Cougar Mountain, this is the trail to take--best in November through May, to avoid the summer clouds of mosquitoes. The route climbs to one of the highest points in the western Issaquah Alps, and along the way you'll find plenty of open viewpoints to take in the scenery of the central Puget Sound basin. The military early on recognized the value of these high peaks and built a missile launch and missile-command radar station atop Anti-Aircraft Peak.

This old road built by workers in the Depression-era Civilian Con-servation Corps (CCC) has been used to link lumber mills, provide miners easier access to their claims, and to give loggers faster access to the big trees of the lower Middle Fork Snoqualmie River. Today, closed to motors, the road provides a wonderful opportunity for hikers to explore the human and natural history of this region.

If you want to reach the beautiful Lewis River quickly, the Speed onto Lewis River is your trail. In the spring and fall, ocean-running steelhead return en masse. Even if you don't plan on fishing, we recommend bringing a pair of polarized sunglasses to help you peer into the swirling cold water and spot the big fish. Look for ripples as the fish lunge up from under big rocks to snatch insects off the surface of the river.

Stunning section of the PCT.  Starts high and stays high, going from Harts Pass to Windy Pass to Holman Pass.

Glacier Peak Wilderness, northwest of Lake Wenatchee. You can barely see Glacier Peak from the westside of the Cascades. Not so from the Buck Creek Trail - where it looms over you like a white monolith. Add to that fields of late summer flowers and a pleasant afternoon breeze and you may be close to rapture.

Wild is the keyword here. Wildflowers, wild berries, and wildlife thrive throughout this area. The trail climbs past Sister Rocks, through a natural resources research area, and onto the summit of Observation Peak.

This trail is situated in the Olympic National Forest. This trail is located in the Dungeness River Valley, a deep cut groove between the Gray Wolf and Quilcene drainages. It takes off from the Upper Dungeness Trail .3 miles from Camp Handy and ends at the National Park boundary.

Long before State Route 20 delivered throngs of tourists to the Methow Valley, the Chancellor Road provided passage to the Okanogan. Up the deep and forbidding Canyon Creek valley, prospectors and profiteers pushed on to Harts Pass and its fields of gold and other minerals and to the boomtowns of Chancellor and Barron. But alas, most of the mines went bust along with the miners. Towns vanished and the Chancellor Road transformed into peaceful trail, traversing a once-again wild corner of the North Cascades.

Perhaps the "best kept secret" among the scores of trails within the Lake Wenatchee region, this one follows along the Little Wenatchee River at a dramatic gorge. A wonderful destination for hikers of all ages and abilities, the river puts on quite a show as it tumbles and froths over rapids and beneath ledges. Amble or while away the afternoon, or combine this hike with one of the other nearby short but sweet trails.

If you want to shed the crowds while still exploring the wonderful routes of the western Snoqualmie Pass region, this might be the destination to consider. Sure, you'll have to share the first section of the route with the hordes, but most of the casual hikers will drop out at Talapus or Olallie Lake. By pushing on, you get higher and quieter country to explore as well as a much more scenic lake basin to enjoy.

Among the many supreme North Cascades Highway hikes, the Maple Pass loop is perhaps the most exalted. More than a few hikers have been caught humming Julie Andrews tunes while sauntering on this scenic sojourn. In just 7 nonrepeating miles you'll be treated to majestic old-growth forests, a sparkling alpine lake, resplendent alpine meadows, enticing open ridges, and stunning North Cascades vistas. And if you love wildflowers, Maple Pass's annual floral show is a bloomin' spectacle.

Ain't it Grand! When viewed from a distant vantage point, Grand Park looks as though a scythe sheared off the top of a mountain, leaving a flat, mesalike meadow sprawling across the forested horizon.

There are two ways to reach Soda Peak Lakes, a beautiful sub-alpine lake in an old growth forest. This approach is from the Government Mineral Springs trailhead to the east. It's a tough hike to a serene location, with plenty of secluded camps.

Hike the Pacific Crest Trail to a relatively unknown but landmark lookout site on a rock pinnacle with a view of 5 snow peaks and segments of the Columbia River. Three Corner Rock sits atop of broad, open ridge surrounded by beargrass meadows in the spring.

A steady steep trail to classic views of Mt. Rainier and southern volcanoes.

An alternate, less steep route to Mount Si

Starting a hike with a serious climb is a good way to limber up your muscles and shake off any casual hikers. \You'll also find panoramic views that encompass the peaks of the Cle Elum Valley and reach south to Mount Rainier.

The trail ascends through steeply sloped meadows into a broad wildflower basin at the head of the valley and eventually leads to a high pass on the ridge, affording awesome views of both the Cle Elum River valley and east into the Icicle Creek drainage.

Sometimes you just want to get high--physically, not psychedelically--and the Lake Ingalls Trail lets you do that while still exploring some of the grandest wildflower displays in the Cascades. You'll climb, descend, and climb again, crossing through no less than three distinct ecosystem types, each with its own species of wildflowers to entice and enchant you.

The Silver Star Trail has captured the attention of many local hikers for very good reasons: it offers a high, meadow-lined ridge and lots of pretty foliage for autumn colors. It's a beautiful little trail, well worth anyone's time to visit.

Water, water everywhere and quite a drop it takes! Cougar Mountain's Coal Creek Falls is the primary attraction here, but it's the water underfoot that really makes the area special. Such abundance helps keep the forest green and fragrant, with wildflowers in season--and abundant summer mosquitoes. Come in November through May, when the nights are too cold for these pesky biters and the falls are full of runoff. In the spring you'll find skunk cabbage, and through the early summer you'll enjoy plump, juicy salmonberries. And at the end, you'll enjoy the cool cascade of Coal Creek Falls.

It's time to go back to high school.  Or maybe flight school. This Tiger Mountain path starts at Issaquah High School and ends at Poo Poo Point, where many paraglider pilots learn to fly their featherweight crafts. In between, you'll find wonderful old forests to explore and a grand path to follow.

Each year, from fall to spring, this area is a bird paradise, with snow geese and trumpeter and tundra swans overwintering in huge numbers. There are several access points in the wildlife refuge. The Headquarters area has a 2-mile trail and staff may be able to point you to other appropriate areas to visit.

This hike goes up through lovely, shady forest to a junction with the Pacific Northwest Trail.

This is a gem of a hike, providing you easy access to the best of the best of the rich L. T. Murray State Wildlife Recreation Area.

One of the highest points on Whidbey, Goose Rock offers the closest thing to "mountain climbing" on the island. Though not exactly a lofty summit, Goose Rock gives spectacular and far-reaching views. From open grassy slopes and mossy rocky ledges, bask in sunshine while catching a gander of a gaggle of surrounding peaks and islands.

With sea stacks, sea otters, sea lions, and ocean scenery for as far as you can see, the 9.4-mile Ozette Triangle is one of the finest hikes on the Olympic Coast. Easily accessible and a loop hike, the Triangle (named for the loop's shape) is a perfect introduction to America's wildest coastline south of Alaska. You won't be alone on this section of wilderness beach, however, for Ozette's admirers are legion. But there's plenty of room, and if you venture this way on a winter weekday you might just find yourself alone with the harlequin ducks.

Climb the second-highest peak on the Kitsap Peninsula for good views of Puget Sound, the Seattle skyline, and Mount Rainier. Of course there are views of the Olympics too, and on the way down you'll get a pretty darn good look at them. This is a working forest, but most of the way is shaded by a cool canopy of evergreens.

A glacial-polished and fractured exposed hunk of sheer cliff on Blanchard Mountain, Oyster Dome is an intriguing and scenic natural landmark. Its base is littered with jumbled boulders, talus fields, and bat-breeding caves. And from atop, views abound of the Sound, mountains, and a smorgasbord of islands. A popular hiking destination year-round, Oyster Dome is the pearl of the Chuckanut Mountains.

If you've hiked to Rattlesnake Ledges and beyond from Rattlesnake Lake, this is a delightful alternative. Thanks to the handiwork of our colleagues in the trail community, you can now reach Rattlesnake Mountain from the west, starting from a new trailhead at Snoqualmie Point.

Upland birds love this sprawling desert prairie. The ground-hugging birds sprint among the tufts of plants. They take refuge, and find dinner, in such glorious wildflowers as balsamroot, large-headed clover, wild onion, and canyon-bottom communities of beautiful orange globe mallow.

When you want to simply stretch your legs and enjoy the woods, this is the trail to explore. The summit of Middle Tiger is wooded, so you won't find grand views. In fact, the entire route is wooded. But that's okay. This area is rich with wildlife, from the winged variety (woodpeckers, flickers, red-tailed hawks, Stellar's jays) to the four-legged kind (deer, bobcats, black bears, cougars, martens, coyotes, raccoons, beavers). There are also the usual suspects when it comes to forest flora--with a variety of trees, bushes, wildflowers, ferns, and mosses--and the usual suspects in summer when it comes to mosquitoes, so visit in fall through spring for swat-free hiking.

When the pressures of the office get too much, this Tiger Mountain trail is just close enough to hike after business hours, and just wild enough to make you forget those urban cares for a few hours. The plethora of trails around the Tradition Lake plateau make for an array of loop options, this one being the longest of the short loops possible. You'll find yourself wandering deep green woods. You'll smell the rich foliage bursting from the damp earth of woodland swamps. You'll hear the song of countless birds. And you'll see a spectrum of native flora and fauna, all within a few moments' walk of the busy interstate corridor.

You'll want to visit this Tiger Mountain swamp during the wet season to really enjoy all it has to offer - July and August can be uncomfortably hot and prime time for mosquitoes. Plus, if you head out during the winter waterfowl migration, you might find a rare treat: wood ducks in the marshy areas. But any time of year can be an adventure here, with a bounty of wild plants and animals to enjoy

Come for the views: they're quite extensive, from Rainier to the Pacific. Come for the trail: it's well built, not heavily used, and it runs a high ridge for miles.

Surrounded by sphagnum bogs and primeval forest tucked in a quiet corner behind bustling Mount Pilchuck, the Ashland Lakes are the showpiece to the Washington State's Department of Natural Resources' 9600-acre Mount Pilchuck Natural Resource Conservation Area (NRCA). The placid lakes are an ideal destination for introducing children to the wonders of nature. Young hikers will especially delight in the numerous boardwalks traversing the saturated and stimulating landscape.

This route covers some of the best of the Teanaway Country, offering high alpine splendor and lush riparian habitats.

The L. T. Murray State Wildlife Recreation Area offers some of the best desert hiking in the state, and this far-eastern edge of the preserve boasts the best of the best.

A diversity of landscape and ecosystems are found along this canyon trek. Starting high and hiking downhill, the route begins in open, Douglas fir forest and ends in sagebrush and scrub grass desert canyons.

The broad, deep chasm of Washtucna Coulee cuts through the sagebrush flats of the Snake River plateau country, providing a wonderful expose of the power of the Great Missoula Floods that carved Washington's coulees after the last great Ice Age.

Millersylvania State Park sports camping, boating and more than 8 miles of hiking trails. The trails zigzag all around, so you are probably able to construct a loop of up to 5 miles - or less. The huge old growth cedar and fir, easy accessibility to I-5 and excellent opportunity for a pleasant walk in the woods make this an attractive place to hike, especially in winter.

A stroll along the sand dunes of Deception State Park's West Beach offers a glimpse into this important geologic feature. The way is easy and interpretive signs provide information about the interesting seaside vegetation unique to this area.

The Worm Flows, long rippling lava flows from an eruption eons ago, roll down the southeast flank of Mount St. Helens creating a remarkably unique environment.

This is a winter scramble up a ruthlessly steep trail, but the views and the scenery along the way are unmatched. The route climbs quickly up a steep ridgeline on a narrow hiking trail, and snowshoers won't find much to look for in the first mile as they struggle up the slope.

This is a perfect route when the snows have been falling heavy and low down on the hills.

If you don't mind company, but prefer to have an easy-to-follow, modestly graded route to explore, this is it. It's perfect for families or for first-timers who just want to get a feel for their new snowshoes. The trail sticks to an old dirt road--groomed on a semiregular basis--that follows the crest of the Wenatchee Mountains from Blewett Pass Sno-Park to a point directly above the Pipe Creek Sno-Park.

When you want solitude and serenity without a lot of uphill effort, the Haney Meadow Loop is a great option.

High Hut is the jewel in the crown of the Mount Tahoma Trails Association. This ridgetop lodge offers an incredible winter getaway for snowshoers and skiers.

Enjoy an easy hike along a salmon-spawning stream in a lush emerald ravine. Twanoh is derived from the Skokomish people, meaning "gathering place."Twanoh State Park protects 182 acres of prime Hood Canal real estate-a perfect place for hikers and wildlife to gather.

A delightful hike any time of year, Spencer Spit is a dynamic environment always in flux. Amble along this protruding point in Lopez Sound watching for playful seals, probing shorebirds, surf-riding waterfowl, and majestic eagles hovering above. The hike is short, but you'll want to linger long, for Spencer Spit is one of the finest beaches in the San Juans.

Take a leisurely stroll through an easily accessible low-country, old-growth forest. Big cedars, big firs, and if you visit in spring, big showy bouquets of flowering Pacific dogwood brightening the dark green groves.

This short, easy, year-round trail meanders under the cool, protective trees of Squak Mountain State Park. It is a treat for kids and adults with fun story boards along the way.

Saunter out on this small peninsula for stunning views of Mount Rainier rising over Puget Sound. Let eagles and kingfishers announce your passing. Admire contorted bluffs, big Doug-firs, and a procession of passing watercraft.

The Iron Horse Trail runs down the middle of the linear John Wayne State Park. The trail utilizes the old rail line known as the Milwaukee Road, which carried locomotives of the Chicago-Milwaukee-St. Paul-Pacific Railroad. The trail runs from Rattlesnake Lake to Idaho and is the only east-west cross-state trail.

Located within the 197-acre Wenatchee Confluence State Park just minutes from downtown Wenatchee, the Horan Natural Area is a wonderful place to take a quiet stroll and contemplate the beauty and importance of our state's rivers. Here the wild Wenatchee River flows into the harnessed Columbia. An oasis among parched hills, Horan is also an oasis for critters amid a rapidly developing valley.

If the long, rocky route around the summit crown of Hamilton is too much for legs, lungs, or time schedule, don't despair. There are alternatives, and the best is this one: Hike up the trail to the twin cascades of Hardy and Rodney Falls.

This easy walk provides some unique opportunities to view the local wildlife--Craggius rattius, better known as crag rats. These human creepy crawlers can be found hanging from their fingertips all along the rocky walls towering over the Iron Horse Trail near the Change Creek canyon. Of course, rock walls draw more than vertically oriented humans. An assortment of birds call these cliff faces home as well--swallows and swifts, hawks and falcons.

Cedar Butte may be the least visited mountain in the Snoqualmie Pass corridor. The smallish butte stands between the popular Rattlesnake Lake and the remote Chester Morse Lake in the Cedar River watershed area. This butte's lack of popularity, though, has more to do with its lack of publicity than its dearth of scenery. Indeed, Cedar Butte offers plenty of scenic spectacle.

This park has 3 miles of hiking trails many of which connect to the Kettles Park Trail System. There is a campground, picnic area, beach walking, historic sites, and bicycling. There is fresh water fishing in Lake Pondilla.

Excelsior! Always upward! And certainly that would be true if you tackled this former lookout site on the High Divide from the North Fork Nooksack Valley. That access would cost you nearly 4000 vertical feet of sweat and toil. But by hiking to this expansive-view-granting promontory via the Damfino Lakes Trail, all of that alpine glory can be yours for a mere song-and only 1500 feet of elevation gain.

Hikers will find views that are unmatched in this part of the state. From the fire-lookout cabin atop the heather-carpeted peak you can scan the horizon in every direction, picking out peaks and valleys throughout the Alpine Lakes Wilderness and south all the way to Mount Rainier (on clear days). The ridges rolling away from Thorp Mountain sport colorful flower meadows, and the blue pool of Kachess Lake sparkles in the deep valley at its foot.

The land that comprises Sun Lakes State Park was purchased over the years in fifteen pieces. The last big chunk was obtained by the state in 1972, when it was bought from the Bureau of Land Management. The desert- and lake-filled park now encompasses more than 4000 acres in and around Grand Coulee. Park Lake is the largest of the lakes in the park, and this trail climbs a picturesque canyon along the lake's eastern flank, providing stunning views of the park.

Spectacular rolling hills, far off views and a flower explosion make this little-known gem a destination to explore and roam through. It's one of the few places hikers can see sagebrush growing side-by-side with sub-alpine larch.

Follow alongside the crashing, thrashing Mad River as it snakes through a deep canyon. Wildfire stripped most of the gorge of its green cover, but remnant big trees still grace the way. And wildflowers too, including rare and showy blooms like Tweedy's lewisia. This is a perfect destination in spring, when the high country is still buried in snow, but wildflowers are blooming like mad along this trail.

This is a great weekend backpacking trip for wildflower lovers. Miles of wildflowers along Meander Meadow and Cady Ridge will delight the hiker who passes through during July and August. Fantastic views of the Cascades, Glacier Peak and plunging valleys add to the allure, and it's all packaged up in a 16-mile loop.

Answer honestly now: how many of you have heard of Little Ranger Peak? This little-known summit trail offers great early season hiking, though it can also be enjoyed all summer and well into au-tumn. The south-facing trail melts out early, but the abundance of deciduous foliage (vine maples, alders, big-leaf maples) makes this is a nice fall-color hike. The trail climbs moderately, and as it tops the peak hikers find fantastic views of Mount Rainier and the mountains of the White River valley. But perhaps the best reason to visit Little Ranger Peak: the outstanding opportunity for some wildland solitude.

Here's a stiff climb to an old lookout site providing splendid viewing up deep, glacially cut valleys ringed by glacially carved summits. Enjoy an eagle's perspective of the West Fork Methow River, Early Winters Creek, Rattlesnake Creek, Robinson Creek, and Lost River valleys, pretty portals to rugged peaks and the Pasayten Wilderness. Melting out early, Driveway Butte makes a good spring high-country probe-great, too, for enjoying blooms. In May and June half the way bursts with showy yellow arrowleaf balsamroot.

Koppen Mountain offers incredible views of the Stuart Range and the jagged peaks of the Teanaway Country. Such views are found on many other trails in this area, but what those other routes don't have is the quiet and solitude found at Koppen. Enjoy this largely forgotten trail and you'll be able to selfishly soak in those views without having to share.

This route follows the Wonderland Trail east of Longmire through some of the oldest, most beautiful ancient forest left in Washington's Cascades, while providing views of the crashing waters of the milky Nisqually River. Families appreciate the nearly flat, easy trek through the trees along the first half of the route, while those with an appetite for more adventure enjoy the last half of the hike as it turns to follow the Paradise River upstream to a pair of pretty waterfalls.

Because of this route's high trailhead, much of your elevation gain is done before you start walking, meaning you can enjoy a high ridge route with relatively modest effort.

A spectacular backcountry lake - one of the largest in the area - awaits those who walk this way. Once the site of a bustling mining operation, complete with company town and lakeside hotel, Goat Lake boasts plenty of history along with its fine views. Waterfalls too!

Think Mount Rainier, and the images that instantly come to mind usually include open meadows, wildflowers, glaciers, and grand views. Green Lake, though, proves there's more to the park than that.

The Bogachiel River snakes through Washington's forgotten rain forest. No main roads run along this major Olympic river, nor penetrate its wild valley. There are no visitors centers here either. No interpretive trails or developed campgrounds amid the towering spruce and fir. There's nothing fancy here at all-just a quiet backcountry trail through pure rainforest wilderness.

Unmatched desert wildflowers bless the dry brown hills with vibrant colors. You'll also find an array of birds and animals--swallows, swifts, bluebirds, chukars, quails, magpies, partridges, hawks, and eagles grace the sky while deer, elk, bighorn sheep, coyotes, rock chucks (marmots), badgers, hares, and an army of other small mammals roam the desert floor.

Mowich Lake is the destination of choice for most folks who want to play on the northwest side of Mount Rainier National Park.

These two little larch-fringed lakes tucked within the basaltic slopes of Mission Ridge make an ideal destination year-round. Clara and Marion offer excellent spring hiking, good heat relief in the summer, a spectacular color show in autumn, and a wonderful family-friendly snowshoeing route in winter. These are the only motor-free trails along Mission Ridge-savor this area's peace along with its beauty.

The hike to big, beautiful Boardman Lake is one of the easiest off of the Mountain Loop Highway. Just under a mile and gaining a mere 250 feet of elevation along the way (and 50 on the way back), this lovely backcountry body of water can be reached by just about every hiker-young and old, long-legged and short-breathed, and everyone else in between.

These are Hope and Mig ponds, actually-but what these two little lakes lack in surface area they make up for in setting. Especially if it's flowers or berries you seek. Set in parkland meadows amid groves of hardy mountain hemlock along the Cascade crest, the lakes and surrounding area invite further exploring. But first you'll need to get there via the Tunnel Creek Trail, an at times steep, at times rocky approach.

A nice creekside hike within the Olympics with the option to check out Marymere Falls on the hike.  This hike has all types of old growth and lush vegetation.

Alpine lakes stir emotions in people, drawing them into their crystalline beauty and stunning wild settings. Most alpine lakes, though, are small affairs. Ponds, really, that can be walked around during an after-dinner stroll. Dewey, on the other hand, stands as one of the monarchs of alpine lakes. This long, broad lake boasts scores of shoreline pockets that offer up the elusive solitude often hard to find in a mountain lake basin. Stunning scenery also awaits, with tall Naches Peak towering overhead and a rich forest cradling the opposite lakeshore.

The hike to Summerland (and higher to Panhandle Gap) is one of the best jaunts on Rainier's Wonderland Trail.

This peak stands apart from other mountains in the area and therefore offers great unobstructed views in all directions. The Forest Service used to maintain a fire lookout station at the summit, and it's easy to see why. The views of the Wind River valley and the southern Washington Cascades are fantastic.

When you head out to explore this dark Iron Horse section, be sure you bring a flashlight--and a headlamp. In fact, make sure every person in your party has a primary light and a backup - this is not a hike you want to do without light. The tunnel is long enough that you'll be in deep, total darkness much of the way.

This trail may have a storybook name, but it offers real-life views and scenic wonders. Climbing steeply through a modest series of switchbacks, the trail tops out on the summit of Sleeping Beauty Peak, with views worthy of inclusion in any fairy tale. The former lookout site provides great vistas of Mount Adams and the emerald ridges and valleys of the Indian Heaven Wil-derness to the southwest.

This little-known gem of a hike on the Washington side of the Columbia River Gorge offers spectacular views of the Columbia River, amazing spring wildflowers and an old garry oak forest of gnarled old trees. This stunning preserve is owned by the Friends of the Columbia Gorge and tops out in an old cherry orchard with a few surviving trees.

Revered through the ages, Shi Shi Beach has its share of disciples, from First Peoples to first-time visitors, naturalists, bird-watchers, hard-core hikers, beach bums, conservationists, politicians, and just plain ordinary folk. And Northwest hikers have consistently rated Shi Shi as one of the region's most beautiful beaches. Though this natural gem's history has had a few blemishes, including access issues, thankfully many of those problems have been washed out to sea.

Mountain rivers are magical, crystal-clear ribbons that inundate your senses. They can be cool massages for your feet. They offer delicate music for your eyes, sparkling flashes in the alpine sunlight. When properly treated, they offer needed refreshment for thirsty hikers.

This route through part of the Quincy Wildlife Recreation Area offers something you seldom find in the desert: a waterfall. But not just any waterfall; here you'll find a waterfall plunging into a lake. Did I mention this watery world is in the desert?

Hikers owe an incredible debt of thanks to Ira Spring. This soft-spoken man and his trail-loving photography did more for trail protection in Washington than any other person in hiking history. It is only fitting that this rehabilitated trail to Mason Lake bears his name. The fact that his namesake trail leads to a beautiful mountain lake is also appropriate, as Ira loved lakes of all kinds and sizes.

The Gloyd Seeps Wildlife Area is a narrow band of habitat--it never exceeds 2 miles in width at any point, but it is very long from north to south, providing plenty of hiking opportunities.

Lake Stuart is an inviting lake beneath the fearsome north face of one of Washington's highest and most imposing peaks. Though not as dramatic as nearby Colchuck Lake, Stuart still serves up plenty of nice scenery, including a close-up of the 9415-foot peak that shares its name. The journey is longer than to Colchuck, but much easier due to Stuart's lower elevation and the gentler topography on the way. Stuart is smaller and shallower than Colchuck, too, but warmer-by late summer, warm enough to even splash in. Try that in nearby Colchuck, whose name means "cold water!"

With all due respect to the Bard, what's in a mountain? That which we call Mount Rose by any other name would still be as steep. This is a challenging hike-one of the steepest trails in the Olympics. Great for conditioning, Rose offers a few scenic rewards too, from beautiful high-elevation old-growth forests to a knockout view of Lake Cushman from 3500 feet directly above it. Consider Rose an alternative to Mount Ellinor. When half of Olympia is crowding Ellinor's summit like goats at a salt lick, you just might be savoring the sweet offerings of Rose all by yourself.

Spectacular 360 degree views from one of the highest peaks in the Snoqualmie pass ares, light scramble, with only 2200 feet elevation gain.

Lake Ann is a deserving detour from the Maple Pass loop hike or a nice and short early or late season hike in its own right. Even if you go no further than the lake, the views are rewarding and the lake quite impressive with its granite backdrop.

Overlooking the east bay of Spirit Lake, this trail drops from the Harmony Falls viewpoint on gentle switchbacks. You'll be awed by the precise pattern of the fallen trees laid low by the huge blast. At the bottom of the trail are volcano-redesigned Spirit Lake and Harmony Falls. Once a beautiful high cascade, Harmony Falls was reduced in height by half.

Great views of the entire Stewart Range on this scramble via the Beverly Turnpike trail.

This broad, paved trail weaves through a lush forest of alpine and noble firs; these trees survived the fiery blast because of their youth and diminutive size.

The meadows alone make the trek to the top of 6500-foot Green Mountain worth the sweat and energy expended. Acres upon acres of emerald slopes burst with a dazzling display of wildflowers. But it's hard to stay focused on Green Mountain's brilliant floral arrangements when its jaw-dropping scenic sideshow is dominated by the gargantuan snow cone of Glacier Peak. Green Mountain offers one of the finest views in the North Cascades, and did I fail to mention the historical fire lookout to boot?

Mount Townsend certainly has its loyal legion of fans. Lofty, prominent, and easily accessible, this northeastern Olympics mountain rarely receives a reprieve from clunking boots and clanking poles. But the scene is quite different at Silver Lakes, nestled in a remote cirque just south of the mountain. These two little alpine lakes receive a fraction of Townsend's traffic. And the scenery? It's as sublime and inspiring as that found at the nearby busy summit.



It's always a good sign when your trail starts in a well-named place. We start this hike at Summit Prairie, a beautiful location 
with a well-earned name. The trail rides the crest of the stunning Quartz Creek Ridge, running through wonderful forest and broad wildflower mea-dows. You can meander at will for 1 mile, or 5, along the ridgetop meadows as you enjoy the views down into the deep valleys of Quartz and French Creeks.

Enjoy a carefree saunter under big timber along a mighty river on this easy and delightful trail. Perfect for lazy summer evenings or quiet winter days, the Skagit River Loop can be enjoyed by all hikers, from the very young to the young at heart. While away the time on a sunny gravel bar or hike all day on the adjoining paths of Newhalem's network of nature trails.

The William O. Douglas Wilderness is a water lover's paradise, but is best visited in late summer and fall. The endless ponds, puddles, and lakes also mean endless bugs. Once a few cold nights have thinned the biting population, you'll be able to enjoy unmatched wilderness rambling among sprawling meadows and potholes. You're in the home range of elk here--and black bear territory too. This hike is a good introduction to the nearly infinite array of loops possible in the William O. Douglas, passing by the dual pools of Twin Lakes, under the shadow of Tumac Mountain's cratered volcanic summit, around Blankenship Lakes, through the sprawling Blankenship Meadows, and, of course, across the heart of Mosquito Valley.

Any time you can hike to the site of an old fire-watch station, you know you'll have grand views--after all, those fire spotters needed a 360-degree panorama to be effective. Bare Mountain stands as one of those old fire-tower sites and, nestled in the westernmost part of the Cascades, this trail offers a unique opportunity to enjoy a wild-country hike with views of the Puget Sound lowlands.

Do this hike not for the destination, but for the journey. "Lake" is an overstatement. Pond, maybe, but Pyramid Puddle is more like it. Still, this easily accessible trail gets a fair amount of traffic, as it makes for a good spring conditioner or late-fall snow prober. And while Pyramid Lake is tiny, some of the trees along the way are anything but small. The real allure of this trail is the impressive old-growth forest it traverses, compensating for any lake letdown

The long, rough ridge of the Horse Heaven Hills stretches for miles above the Yakima River Valley. The spiny ridge is a true desert treasure--barren of trees and scoured endlessly by winds sweeping in from the Columbia River Basin, the Horse Heaven Hills are nonetheless well named.

While Round Lake, tucked securely in a hidden basin on Lost Creek Ridge, is a wonderful locale, this hike is definitely more about the journey than the destination. After a demanding initial grunt, amble along a mile-high, flower-swaying, peak-packed, view-granting ridge. Savor one of the finest vantages for admiring spiraling Sloan Peak's sprawling sparkling glacier. And if you can ever move your eyes away from this mesmerizing mountain, a multitude of others demand your attention as well.

This hike has a little of everything. One can be completely satisfied stopping at Forgotten meadows and drinking in the alpine meadows or the more adventurous can follow a faded trail through it's ups and downs to a distant tarn and the final push to an eagle's perch summit.

This area was one of the most recent additions to the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife's inventory of protected wildlife habitat lands. It is also one of the most important pieces of protected wildlife habitat in the state.

This .5 mile loop trail goes through old growth forest, with views of the Sol Duc River.

Enjoy amazing views of the Sauk and Skagit river basins, and that's just from the trailhead parking lot! From the summit of this former fire lookout the views are beyond amazing. They're superlatively stupendous! And the wildflowers. Tread this way in mid-July for a floral show second to none. Short and sweet and just a tad bit steep, a score-plus set of switchbacks sets you on your way to this scenic summit.

The sprawling public land preserve of the Oak Creek State Wildlife Area offers some of Washington's best extended desert hiking. This route allows you to enjoy a mild day hike or a gentle backpacking trip.

This route offers a wonderful introduction to the diversity of the Pacific Crest Trail in a relatively short hike. Do it as a long hike, a simple overnight backpacking trip, or set up a base camp at one of the fine campsites along the way and enjoy a few days exploring the flank of the big volcano.

One of the largest petrified forests on the planet sits in the center of Washington State. The ancient trees were mineralized into rock during the great lava flows that swept the inland Northwest. In addition to petrified ginkgos (one of the oldest tree species in the world), the "rock forest" includes mineralized Douglas fir, spruce, walnut, and elm.

This corner of the state is a very wild land and makes you feel very small in God's creation. This is one of the most remote parts of Washington, with a small human population in the immediate area but a huge population of wildlife and birds.



Here's one priceless piece of property on an island of million-dollar building lots. At nearly 400 acres, Gazzam Lake and Close Beach make up the second-largest undeveloped tract of land on Kitsap County's Bainbridge Island. Managed as a natural preserve by the Bainbridge Island Parks Department, it's a prime hiking spot in heavily populated Puget Sound.



Take this stiff climb to an old lookout site that looks out directly over Lake Wenatchee-and beyond. Hot and dry in summer, but a good choice in early season because it's often 90 percent snow-free by Memorial Day, Dirtyface provides a great heart conditioner and a lot of visual treats for the eyes. The views are stunning and expansive, from sun-baked Mission Ridge to snowcapped Glacier Peak.

Ascend a cloud-snagging summit on the eastern edge of the Sawtooth Ridge, a serrated backbone of 8000-plus-foot peaks. Stare west to wind-blasted, sky-reaching rock, east to golden wheat fields crackling in the sun, and south to Lake Chelan sparkling more than 1 mile below. Come in summer for the flowers, in autumn for the larches. Come anytime for the solitude. The hike is fairly easy, but reaching the trailhead isn't. Access to North Navarre is via one of the most grueling roads this side of Bolivia.

There are few mountaintops in Washington that are accessible by such a short and easy trail.

Spend a couple of hours or all day exploring a wildlife-rich estuary at the farthest reaches of fjordlike Hood Canal. Let eagles, osprey, herons, otters, and deer captivate you on this hike through grassy wetlands and along the Union River.

This old ranch, complete with abandoned farmhouse and outbuildings, has been shed of its domestic livestock in favor of turning the land over to the abundant wildlife that thrives here. Jackrabbits (both white-tailed and black-tailed) bound through the sagebrush, mule deer browse among the wildflower prairies, and coyotes prowl the coulees and canyons (seeking those bounding jacks, no doubt).

Forest Lake may be the most underappreciated lake within Mount Rainier National Park. You won't find grand views. It's not in a broad, sun-filled meadow. There is minimal camping space available and not a lot of potential for extending the relatively short mileage. Many hikers see those as negatives. Perfect! Because that means there's a much higher likelihood that you and I can enjoy this wonderful route in relaxing solitude. What you will find is a gorgeous forest valley, a pristine woodland pond, lots of huckleberries (reason enough to visit!) and a wide assortment of wildlife.

This is a great day hike on the Kitsap Penninsula. The trail is well maintained, but rocky.

This is a hike to a two-tiered waterfall located in a fairyland grotto with many large moss covered boulders.

Located in the eastern part of the Mount Adams Ranger District, this trail is adjacent to the Yakama Indian Reservation. Climbing along an old sheep trail, this route climbs gently through a forest that has seen selective timber harvesting. The logging scars are faint.

Windy Gap may be the most underrated trail destination in Mount Rainier National Park.

Table Mountain's dramatic south face and pyramid profile beckon the adventurous hiker ready for a strenuous climb that is good training for summer summit attempts to come. The top features one of the best panoramas of the Columbia River Gorge, as well as views of Mt. St. Helens, Rainier, Hood and Adams. Carry a guidebook with good route information as there are a couple of options to the summit and signage may be lacking.

Hike to a real hole in the wall of a place: a genuine natural sea arch carved by surf and wind in an out-of-the-way section of the wild Olympic Coast. And while the Hole-in-the-Wall is an outstandingly beautiful place, the hike there via Rialto Beach doesn't exactly suffer from a dearth of spectacular scenery. Flanked by sea stacks, lined with giant logs, windswept and strewn with cobblestones, Rialto has all the makings of an Olympic wilderness beach. But unlike its wild counterparts, you don't have to hike very far to get here. The beautiful beach begins right from the parking lot.















In his book, "Day Hiking Columbia River Gorge", Craig Romano describes this as "one of the most spectacular trails in America"! 6 major waterfalls can be seen in a 12.5 mile RT hike.





This unique desert canyon is part of the Oak Creek State Wildlife Area. Nestled between the sprawling expanse of the L. T. Murray State Wildlife Recreation Area and the Wenatchee National Forest, the Oak Creek State Wildlife Area holds some of the richest wildlife habitat in the state.

A 2,200 acre area including numerous short hikes, there is something here for everybody. Families can take the short trail 20 to Whistle Lake, while others can plan a route to include several of the features of the area that include a summit with a view of Puget Sound, several lakes, and even a bog.

The good news is you'll have unmatched views nearly every step along this trail. Grand vistas to the north, east, south, and west await you here, so even if you can hear the tourist traffic on its way to and from Sunrise, you'll still have a great adventure--and you'll find your camera full of some of the best pictures of Mount Rainier you'll ever get.

Hemlock or Huckleberry would be a more suitable name for this lake, as you'll be hard-pressed finding heather growing along the shores of this backcountry beauty. A misnomer yes, but a lake you'll not want to miss. Cradled beneath knolls of meadows along the Cascade crest and set in a deep forest of primeval proportions, Heather Lake is a pure gem. And the trail is a near delight! But you won't be alone here, as plenty of your fellow hikers are well aware of all of this.

Stand in awe watching the swift-moving waters of the North Fork Skokomish River barrel and thunder over a series of cascades. A great hike anytime of year, Staircase Rapids is especially impressive during the spring runoff. Hikers of all ages will be delighted on this easy and captivating hike.

Hop aboard the Spruce Railroad Trail for a scenic and historic hike along the sparkling shores of massive Lake Crescent. For 4 nearly flat miles you'll saunter along one of Olympic National Park's most alluring natural features. Nine miles long, over 600 feet deep, and surrounded by steep ridges and peaks, Lake Crescent seems more like a fjord. With a microclimate of warmer and drier conditions than areas just a few miles away, this trail is a good hiking choice on an overcast afternoon.

With its crown of radio towers, Selah Butte doesn't seem, at first glance, like a desert wilderness. But the expanse of open public lands that surround this massive butte harbors some of the best desert ecosystems in the area. Selah stands on the eastern edge of the Yakima River Canyon, offering amazing views of the canyon and the sheer wall of the Yakima Rim.

This is the perfect early-season hiking adventure. The loop route keeps you exploring new trail from start to finish, and there's a lot to explore here. The trail climbs through lush old forests, skirts along the view-rich rims of high cliffs, and weaves through a rich wetland environment along the river-side meadows.

Kids, as well as parents, love this short hike since it's just long enough to tire out young legs without being too tiring--you can set aside your worries about having to tote your tot back to the trailhead.

With about 13 miles of one-way mileage, this route stands out as one of the longest shrub-steppe hikes in Washington. You could arrange a vehicle shuttle to enjoy the entire distance one-way, or you could do a daylong round-trip hike of 26 miles.

The northernmost section of the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument sees far fewer visitors than any other part of the monument, or so it seems to us. There's no real reason for this, as far as I know, other than it's a bit more remote. But it's certainly no less scenic. The Green River-Vanson Peak section of the monument offers some great hiking scenery to explore, and the Goat Creek Trail provides a great introduction to the region.

Travel along a rugged knolled snowy and rocky spine above glaciers and barren slopes to almost within embracing distance of majestic Baker. Across alpine tundra, and snowfields that never retreat in summer's heat, feel the pulse of the frozen volcano on this hike. But be forewarned: this trail is more of a climbers path, rough and sketchy in spots, buried beneath snow in others. Take ice ax and map and turn around when the going gets spooky. If you're prepared and conditions are good, however, your journey across Ptarmigan Ridge will be one of the most stimulating and exhilarating in your life.

This hike begins with the wide, paved Lava Canyon Interpretive Trail, which leads to a viewing platform overlooking a stunning canyon-a deep, jagged cut through a thick layer of ancient lava. You won't find grand vistas or sweeping panoramas here. You will find a remarkable lesson in geological change-this valley was carved in part by volcano-induced mudflow.

You'll climb in a long, steady push over the course of this 3-mile trail. No switchbacks, few turns, just a straight out and back to the South Peak of French Cabin Mountain--dropping briefly, then climbing steeply again to skirt just below the lower North Peak on the way.

The Lime Kiln Trail not only takes you deep into a lush and remote canyon carved by the South Fork Stillaguamish River, but also leads you deep back into history. Developed almost entirely by volunteers, this delightful trail serves up a unique journey into the heart of Snohomish County's 970-acre Robe Canyon Historical Park.

Lenore Lake Caves were formed 12,000 years ago when the area was flooded by melting ice. The "Shelter" part of the name comes from the fact that the caves were used by native tribes thousands of years ago. Today, visitors may view petroglyphs inside the caves. Seven caves are accessible by the maintained trail.

This last leg of the PCT (or first depending on whether you're north- or southbound) offers breathtaking views as it passes along the eastern edge of the North Cascades and into the Pasayten Wilderness. Make sure to bring your passport to complete your journey in Manning Provincial Park!

Hike to the largest of three gorgeous backcountry lakes set in deep scoured cirques, or scramble up a narrow spine to Trappers Peak to snag some of the best alpine viewing this side of the Continental Divide. Both destinations will cost you dearly in caloric output. Lots of elevation gain over steep and rough terrain is what keeps this day-hike-accessible corner of the North Cascades National Park from being overrun.

WTA has been helping to build trails in this beautiful area near Richland. Its a great place for folks to recreate, with several trails for hiking, biking and equestrian. The views from the summit extend in every direction and include the plains of Central Washington, the Columbia and Yakima Rivers, the Tri Cities, Hanford Reach and the White Bluffs, and distant glimpses of Mt. Rainer and Mt. Adams.

Hike through a forest of madronas and Doug-firs to a long sandy beach with impressive views of Mount Rainier towering in the distance. Walk out on a narrow spit. Explore a lagoon flourishing with birds. Watch playful seals ply harbor waters or comb the shoreline of this delightful maritime park. Jefferson County's South Indian Island Park is one of the best-kept secrets on the Olympic Peninsula.

Scrambling along open ridge tops draped in grass and wildflowers, hikers here easily lose the trail as it fades under the rich plant life and disappears between jumbles of rock. Further complicating things, the glorious views prevent hikers from devoting their full attention to the trail--there's just too much beauty and natural splendor to enjoy.



This may be the steepest climb in the entire Dark Divide Roadless Area. It is certainly the steepest climb that is sustained for more than a few miles-you'll be huffing every step of the way up this 4-plus-mile monster, but once you top out, your worries are behind you and you can enjoy the breath-taking (!) views from this towering peak in this scenery-rich part of the Gifford Pinchot National Forest.

A tranquil lake at the edge of the Glacier Peak Wilderness, chances are you'll have this place to yourself. The trail can be rough, overgrown, and at times steep-three good reasons for the crowd control. Kick back and harvest berries at the lake or, if you're feeling energetic, head off for Circle Peak on a rehabilitated trail to an old lookout site with mouthwatering views.

There aren't many examples of temperate rain forest left standing in the southern Cascades. Most of these moss-laden cathedral forests are found on the Olympic Peninsula or along the Coastal Range of Oregon. To be sure, there are old-growth forest stands throughout the Cascades, but very few are of the rain-forest variety. Here is one of those last remnants of the ancient lowland rain forests.

This short hike leads through lush old forest to a picturesque waterfall and a cool woodland camp along a pretty forest stream. The trail lacks the panoramic views and awesome alpine scenery you'll find along so many other Mount Rainier trails. Instead, this short walk offers you a look at a different aspect of this multifaceted park.

Seldom visited but deserving of more attention, this route rolls past a couple of sparkling waterfalls, climbs through lush old forest, and leads to moderate views from a wooded pass above a pretty wooded lake basin. The trail is on the maintenance logs, but the relatively light use leaves the route brushy and the trail tread rough at times. The best favor we can do for this sweet little forest route is to use it: the path needs people to use it and love it. It offers a great outing in a part of the park seldom visited by the hordes that descend on the big mountain each year.

This area is a natural coulee. The sandy soil allows water to drain through soil and collect in the bottom of the coulee forming the Wahluke Branch-10 (WB-10) Wasteway. The wasteway water flows westward into the White Bluffs area.

Douglas Creek carves through the bottom of a deep, foliage-rich canyon in the heart of Washington's central plains. The views of the deep canyon are spectacular, and the stark rock walls and structures provide fascinating lessons in geology.

Enjoy a spectacular view of jagged and icy peaks from a lookout on a mile-high ridge above the confluence of the Skagit and Cascade rivers. Or venture to a large alpine lake tucked in an open cirque beneath glacial Little Devil Peak on the western edge of the North Cascades National Park. Whichever destination you choose, prepare for some serious climbing. It's an arduous ascent to these awesome destinations, but worth every ounce of sweat expended.

By far the most difficult stretch of PCT in Washington, Section K puts hikers through a grueling 117-mile trek over harsh terrain and treacherous conditions. Yet those intrepid enough to attempt it are rewarded with a true wilderness experience in and among some of the country's most pristine and beautiful surroundings.

By late spring, this area becomes very hot and dry, yet every valley bottom is covered with lush green vegetation and at least a small body of water --be it a creek, a lake, or a largish bog/mosquito hatchery.

This is a prime example of a desert hiking area that offers many hours of slow wandering and contemplation of the unique environment, even though the mileage isn't as great as some other areas. You'll find exciting geological formations and history as you explore the huge canyon/coulee that holds the Twin Lakes.

Hike to an emerald lake in a subalpine setting. The trip is long, but the terrain is welcoming and the surroundings peaceful. Miles of magnificent old growth shade the way. Come in midsummer and enjoy a swim. Visit in late summer and reap a bounty of succulent huckleberries. Make the trip on a chilly autumn day and look forward to a hot-springs soak on the way out.

Venture to where the deer and the mountain goats play-to a precipitous ridge above a massive glacier on Three Fingers, one of the most prominently recognizable peaks in the Cascades. En route take in ancient forest, a pastoral mountain lake, and acres of amazing meadows and parklands punctuated with tarns. And did I mention the bountiful berry patches?

With trails like this, it is nearly impossible to forget that this entire region was shaped and built by volcanic activity. This little cinder cone is a wonderful place to explore and to enjoy some beautiful views from the top of the butte.

The Jackpine Shelter Interpretive Trail explores an old forest and its interaction with the surrounding volcanic environment. Despite the Mount St. Helens catastrophe of May 18, 1980, this beautiful, ancient forest grove remains wonderfully intact.

A 140-foot silvery veil of refreshing mountain water draped over shiny granite slabs and lined with stately pines, this is one of the prettiest cascades in the Cascades. And while the falls itself is a real treat, the loop trail leading to, below, and above it is sure to delight even more-especially the young set. Beautifully crafted with stone steps and bridges and adorned with attractive railings and sun-kissed benches, it's an aesthetically appealing complement to the captivating falls.

By our estimation, and from a mature geologist's point of view, this area is equally as grand as the aptly named Grand Coulee. Geology on a mind-blowing scale can be seen here. Moses Coulee boasts towering, sheer basalt walls, intricately sculpted rock forms, and an astounding array of flora and fauna.

Kamiak Butte stands like an island in the rolling wheat fields of the Palouse country--not merely a physical island of rock jutting up above the fertile soils of the Palouse hills but also an "ecosystem island."

Ask Washington hikers to describe their idea of "wilderness" and most will talk passionately about alpine lakes, towering spires of rock, glaciers, ancient forests, and deep river valleys. One of Washington's finest protected wilderness areas, though, fails to meet any of those expectations.

This is desert hiking at its best--a lovely trail (a fisher trail turned into a great hiking trail) that bobs up and down over little dunes for miles. As you walk through the sand dune environment, enjoy expansive views to the south overlooking the heart of the Potholes area--miles and miles of water surrounded by miles and miles of sand dunes.

Broad, rolling sand dunes. A wide, gurgling blue creek. Deep, emerald-green lakes. Towering mountains and vast meadows of desert wildflowers. All await you here.

Dry Falls was once the world's largest (in water volume) waterfall in the world, but that was during the Great Missoula Floods at the end of the last Ice Age. Today the falls is a massive cirque of basalt: Dry Falls Lake.

The drive up glorious Moses Coulee alone is worth the trip to this area, even if you never leave your vehicle. If you do decide to stretch your legs, the payoff is all the more fantastic: desert prairies, steep canyons, crashing waterfalls, fields of flowers, aerial antics of birds large and small, and more pure natural splendor than you'd expect from a desert canyon.

This area is a natural coulee. The sandy soil allows water to drain through soil and collect in the bottom of the coulee forming the Wahluke Branch-10 (WB-10) Wasteway. The wasteway water flows westward into the White Bluffs area. The gradual slope of this coulee has allowed the water to spread out and form several small ponds and cattail marshes. Russian olive and willow trees have been spreading rapidly, taking over some of the wetlands.

This area is part of eastern Washington's channeled scabland, created by glacial floodwaters of the Pleistocene epoch. It is mostly rolling countryside with basalt outcroppings forming cliffs, mesas, box canyons, and potholes.

The wildlife viewing throughout the Grande Ronde country is stunning. At times, wild turkeys can be seen flying (a rarity!) from one side of the canyon to the other, and they always seem to be roaming the highlands. Hungarian partridge, ruffed and blue grouse, partridge, and quail all can be found scurrying through the brush on quiet spring days. Bighorn sheep can be viewed on the canyon cliffs above the river, too, if you are fortunate.

The rewards of this wonderful hike are pretty straightforward. You get to wander a great jeep road for 3 miles to a glorious desert waterfall. You'll have the opportunity to enjoy a side trip to the banks of picturesque Rock Creek. You'll also find amazing views of basalt mesas rising 150 to 200 feet above the surrounding landscape. In short, this is a desert journey with incredible water works.

The Desert Wildlife Area encompasses 35,100 acres. This was a true desert prior to the coming of the Columbia Basin Irrigation Project. Black sands (ground-up basalt) formed sand dunes, which were very actively moving until recent times.

Pocket wilderness, backyard wilderness, urban wilderness-all are appropriate descriptions of the sprawling forested ridge between the cities of Snohomish and Monroe known as Lord Hill. Over 1400 acres of this emerald upland on the Snohomish River are protected from development within Snohomish County's Lord Hill Regional Park, providing excellent outdoor wanderings close to ever-burgeoning Puget Sound cities.

Ranking among the supreme ridge-running, cloud-probing, peak-peering jaunts in all of the North Cascades, the trek to Grasshopper Pass will have you hopping with joy with its nonstop horizon-spanning views of jagged ridges and colossal summits. Best of all, this alpine rapture is achieved with minimal effort. The trail starts high and stays high. And with the trail's gentle ups and down, most hikers young and old, two and four legged will have no problem making the journey.

Stroll across rolling emerald fields, climb coastal bluffs towering above crashing surf, and wander along a driftwood-strewn beach, gazing across busy coastal waters to a backdrop of snowcapped Olympic Mountains. And there's more! Prairie flowers, bald eagles, shorebirds, and historic relics. One of the finest coastal hikes in the Northwest, Ebey's Landing is one of Washington's most naturally diverse as well as historically significant places.

If you only have time to do one of the trails framing Coldwater Lake, make it this one. You've got the history, wildlife, and the breathtaking volcanic landscape.





Artist Point may have earned its name because of the oft-captured image of the broad meadows filled with summer wildflowers, backed by the towering rock summit of Mount Shuksan and glacier-crowned Mount Baker. But many feel the area is even more beautiful and worthy of reproduction on film or canvas when shrouded with snow.

Pine forests give way to basalt lava beds as you climb east along the Pacific Crest Trail to the timberline on graceful Mount Adams. This wonderfully formed mountain is one of the youngest of the big volcanoes, and as such, hasn't yet lost its smooth cone shape to the forces of erosion. The only thing that could make the mountain more attractive is to see it reflected in the cold waters of a wilderness lake. Looking Glass can't truthfully be called a lake-it's far too small for that-but when the winds are calm and the air is clear, the tiny tarn does reflect the face of Adams as well as any looking glass.

Looking for a great day at the beach with the dog? Double Bluff is the place to be! Time it just right and at low tide you could walk for miles!

This natural preserve managed by the Washington State Department of Natural Resources (DNR) is a huge 6000-acre area along the top portion of the long rolling hills and ridges known as the Columbia Hills, extending from The Dalles Mountain area westward.

The meadows surrounding the old historic cabin in the Hunting Ground are wonderfully diverse in both flora and fauna. The meadows also provide glorious views of Mount Rainier and the lesser summits of Copper Mountain, Pyramid Peak, and Iron Mountain. Note: Check with the ranger before heading out to make sure the footbridge across Kautz Creek is intact, especially if you are doing an early-season hike.

The name tells you when to visit: Come early so you can be up on the summit as the sun rises in the east, bringing the massive snowcone of Mount Adams to life. Seeing the sun throw brilliant golden light onto the snowy white peak first thing in the morning is a wonderful way to start a day.

Climb through incredible high-mountain meadows, then scramble up a rocky peak to amazing three-volcano panoramas, and along a stark knife-edge ridge to a divide between the Packwood Lake basin and the Tieton River valley.

Steep but very rewarding hike through forest to vast meadows with flowers and fat ripe berries, to a former lookout site with stunning views of Mount Rainier, the Goat Rocks crest and Mount Adams

Start at a beautiful mountain stream and end at a gorgeous moun-tain lake. The trail climbs moderately from start to finish, but is well maintained and stays in the cool shade of the forest. Squaw Lake is a great family destination.

Enjoy a spectacular view of jagged and icy peaks from a lookout on a mile-high ridge above the confluence of the Skagit and Cascade rivers.

Snoqualmie Pass grows ever more developed each year. Condos go up left and right, the ski area plans new ski lifts (or replacements for existing chairs), and hotels pop up east and west. But even with the development, these are still mountains and there is still stunning mountain scenery to enjoy, even on the fringes of the developed areas. Lodge Lake stands as proof.

This short trail loops through wildflower meadows and offers grand views down onto one of the park's largest glaciers--the Nisqually. Unfortunately, this glacier is retreating faster than most, too, so it is shrinking more each year. Take the kids to show them this changing landscape--it's a great lesson in climate change.

Rising to an elevation of 8242 feet, Tiffany Mountain is a lofty summit and one of the highest peaks in the Cascades that can be easily hiked. With a trailhead at 6500 feet, not much sweat needs to be expended to reach Tiffany's rocky and grassy wide-open summit. Centerpiece to the highlands sharing its name, Tiffany hovers over a windswept world of flower-bursting meadows and delicate alpine tundra at the extreme eastern reaches of the Cascades. Once the domain of solitary sheepherders, Tiffany now hosts intrepid hikers and solitude seekers.

England may have Winchester Cathedral, but here in Washington State we have Winchester Mountain, in the natural cathedral of the North Cascades. From the restored lookout perched atop this heavenly peak, praise boundless beauty beaming before you. Sparkling lakes, shining snowfields, and rows of mountain spires separated by deep emerald valleys-simply divine. And best of all, just a little physical sacrifice is required on this moderate hike.

Most hikers enter the Goat Rocks Wilderness from the western side, but those who come in from the east find the wilderness just as beautiful and wild, and much less crowded. The Surprise Lake Trail is one of the few that enter from the east, and it is also one of the most gentle and scenic.

Benchmark is the benchmark in the Central Cascades when it comes to supreme alpine meadows. At this high point on West Cady Ridge, one of the most spectacular ridgeline hikes in this guidebook, the only thing superseding the flowers is the views. The hike is long and there's quite a climb involved, but excellent views begin at 4 miles, making a shorter trip a satisfying option.

The short route to Crater Lake was originally constructed by miners and fishermen, and is NOT a well-maintained trail. However, the tread is well defined and generally easy to follow.

Hike around a tranquil little lake nestled in the hills just south of bustling Port Townsend. Amble through peaceful groves of fir and cedar. Savor the sweet smell of blossoming rhododendrons in the spring. Watch nervous ducks swim across placid waters while songbirds nesting in shoreline reeds hum sweet melodies. Gibbs Lake is a sanctuary for man and beast. But it almost didn't turn out this way. Thanks to negotiations by the Jefferson Land Trust, the Washington State Department of Natural Resources ceased logging here and converted the 669-acre haven into a county park.

Come winter, the heavy blankets of snow turn the clearcuts into expansive meadows, and the roads into meandering trails. The north district of the trail system provides one of the easiest to reach and most scenic huts in the network.



This is perhaps the single most spectacular day hike in the entire park. It's also one of the toughest, but the workout is well worth the effort. This section of the Wonderland Trail is also the highest of that entire 94-mile loop route.

Coal-black basalt bluffs and towering colonnades stand over the Packer Creek property. An intermittent lake nestled in the base of a coulee at the east side of the tract dries out in late summer, but throughout the winter and spring it provides a good home to waterfowl.

This trail proves that not all hikes have to be epic outings to be enjoyable. Though short, this loop is a great learning adventure for folks of all ages. Preteen kids will especially love exploring its watery world of lakes and creeks, as well as diving deep into century-old forests.

Here's the beef on Cow Heaven. It's a steep and demanding climb through thick forest culminating in lonely alpine meadows. The cows are long gone from this former summer grazing area high above the Skagit Valley, but you can feast to your heart's content on splendid views of snowy North Cascades summits. A great conditioner and good choice for solitude, if you're feeling energetic, follow this steer-way to heaven all the way to the rocky Helen Buttes for even grander views.

Beautiful canyon views. Well maintained though rocky trail to 2600 ft summit.

This lake is a popular summer destination for family campers, and it is even more impressive when visited in winter. The large lake is just outside the border of the Goat Rocks Wilderness Area, and an old service road slices through the forest alongside a water pipeline all the way to the dam at the lower end of the lake. The hike from the road end to the lake weaves through thick, old forest, and views are limited. But the local scenery makes up for the lack of distant sights.

Mallardy Ridge is one of the spectacular wild areas that is seldom enjoyed by summer hikers because there are few true trails and no protection from motorized recreationists. Come winter, the old logging roads become de facto trails as the snow drifts over and around them, turning this heavily roaded area into a wild, scenic wonderland.

Here's a route that lets snowshoers push themselves to the limit of their endurance, or if they'd rather, lets them enjoy a wonderful wilderness trek without much effort. Either way, enjoy wonderful scenery, stunning views, and a quiet solitude seldom experienced in the popular Alpine Lakes Wilderness.























































In the shadows of Mount Ellinor, enjoy this circuitous route around the Big Creek drainage. There are plenty of pretty resting and contemplation spots along the way. Plenty of cascades too, along Big Creek and the smaller creeks feeding into it.

Thick old-growth forest of Douglas-fir and hemlock line the lower trail, while ridgetop meadows and clear alpine vistas await you on the upper trail. The path climbs steeply and steadily, giving you a good workout. But the payoff for that work includes glorious views of Mount Rainier and the Goat Rocks Peaks, as well as the many rocky summits of the Tatoosh Range.

This narrow forest trail climbs gently alongside a gurgling ice-rimmed creek and leads to a picturesque alpine lake.

Two adventures in one await you at Striped Peak. First, hike to a 1000-foot peak rising above the Strait of Juan de Fuca. Watch liners and vessels ply this passageway connecting Puget Sound to the Pacific against a backdrop of craggy peaks on Canada's Vancouver Island. Then head directly to the strait to explore a series of tide pools up close. Hike a steep trail down to a remote cliff-enclosed cove, or leisurely wander across a sandy beach on a picturesque bay.

Snowshoes, though, make easy work of this trail, climbing gently as it does through deep, dry-side forests to end at the site of a pretty little waterfall. This cascade is rather unspectacular in summer months, but cloaked in snow and ice, the falls becomes a wonderful work of water art.

The roar of the highway is unmistakable when starting up this track, but soon the beauty of the winter wilderness surrounding the trail makes everything else fade into the background.

The Wonderland Trail wraps around Mount Rainier, delving into every ecological zone on the mountain. This section carries you through several of those zones, including low-elevation old-growth forests, rich riparian zones, and higher-altitude fir and hemlock forests. You'll also explore an old forest fire site and check out one of the park's established backcountry camps. It's a wonderful route for early-summer exploration. Note: Check with the ranger before heading out to make sure the footbridge across Kautz Creek is intact, especially if you are doing an early-season hike.











The BLM showed good sense in preserving this wonderful, if small, slice of desert paradise. Wilson Creek flows south of Govan (past an old turn-of-the-nineteenth-century schoolhouse in Govan). From the south access trailhead, you'll find a lovely trail, great wildflowers, wonderful views up and down the Wilson Creek coulee, and an incredible vantage from which to view wildlife: owls, prairie falcons, northern harriers, red-tailed and rough-legged hawks, warblers, white-crowned and golden-crowned sparrows, horned larks, meadowlarks, mountain bluebirds--it pays to visit in different seasons!

This is a wonderful trail for snowshoers of all tastes. Like to ‘shoe where there are great panoramic vistas of mountain peaks? No problem. Like trails with pretty local scenery? This one has some of the finest subalpine meadows and forests in the country, all blanketed in the deepest snow found in Washington.

This scenic trail climbs gently to the shore of June Lake, a small, shallow pool near the timberline on the southern flank of Mount St. Helens.  The south bank of the lake is a gorgeous tapered beach of gray sand. While the cinder cone summit is hidden behind a ridge, there are good views of the south end of the Worm Flows, an interesting network of mud and lava flows.

Good views, good fishing, good berry picking, good hiking-all on a trail without a good amount of use! This gem of a trail exists because of the goodwill of Walt Bailey and his Civilian Conservation Corps buddies. But we're not talking the 1930s, here. This trail was constructed in the 1990s, when Walt was in his seventies. A lifelong love for the area led Walt and his friends to construct this wonderful trail entirely with volunteer labor.

You'll be wagging your tongue over both the workout and the views after you enjoy this route. The workout comes by way of the last 0.75 mile to the summit, but you'll definitely earn the payoff you'll find at the top: stunning views of the Cispus River Valley and the peaks of the Dark Divide Roadless Area.

This is a steep but short trail with incredible views and great wildlife viewing opportunities. The trail climbs relentlessly from the first step, first through cool forest and then finally, near the top, in open meadow.

Snowshoe through some of the oldest, most beautiful ancient forest left in Washington's Cascades while enjoying views of the rolling, crashing waters of the milky Nisqually River.

This is a stark river valley walk, providing an in-depth examination of a mudflow valley and the forest it pierces. Few folks venture up this trail, so chances are good you'll have it to yourself.

Overcrowded in summer months, this trail is too often overlooked in the winter. The trail ascends through open fir and hemlock forests, dips low and rolls alongside a pretty mountain stream a time or two, and finally deposits dedicated snowshoers on the shores of a wide, pretty alpine lake nestled below a steep, avalanche-ravaged ridge.



